The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Young Adventurer, by Horatio Alger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Young Adventurer
       or Tom's Trip Across the Plains

Author: Horatio Alger

Release Date: November 20, 2008 [EBook #27300]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNG ADVENTURER ***




Produced by Fox in the Stars, Brenda Lewis, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











THE

YOUNG ADVENTURER

OR

TOM'S TRIP ACROSS THE PLAINS

BY

HORATIO ALGER, JR.

          AUTHOR OF "THE BACKWOODS BOY," "FROM CANAL BOY TO
          PRESIDENT," "WALTER SHERWOOD'S PROBATION," "NED
          NEWTON," "ADRIFT IN NEW YORK," ETC.


          NEW YORK
          HURST & COMPANY
          PUBLISHERS




ALGER SERIES FOR BOYS.


UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME.

BY HORATIO ALGER, JR.

          Adrift in New York.
          Andy Gordon.
          Andy Grant's Pluck.
          Bob Burton.
          Bound to Rise.
          Brave and Bold.
          Cash Boy.
          Chester Rand.
          Do and Dare.
          Driven from Home.
          Erie Train Boy.
          Facing the World.
          Hector's Inheritance.
          Helping Himself.
          Herbert Carter's Legacy.
          In a New World.
          Jack's Ward.
          Jed, the Poor House Boy.
          Julius, the Street Boy.
          Luke Walton.
          Making His Way.
          Only an Irish Boy.
          Paul, the Peddler.
          Phil, the Fiddler.
          Ralph Raymond's Heir.
          Risen from the Ranks.
          Sam's Chance.
          Shifting for Himself.
          Sink or Swim.
          Slow and Sure.
          Store Boy.
          Strive and Succeed.
          Strong and Steady.
          Tin Box.
          Tom, the Bootblack.
          Tony, the Tramp.
          Try and Trust.
          Young Acrobat.
          Young Outlaw.
          Young Salesman.

          _Price Post-Paid, 35c. each, or any three
          books for $1.00._


          HURST & COMPANY
          PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK.




CONTENTS


   CHAPTER                                PAGE
       I MARK NELSON'S FAMILY                3
      II TOM FINDS A WALLET                 10
     III TOM ASKS A LOAN                    17
      IV TOM ASKS LEAVE OF ABSENCE          25
       V TOM RAISES THE MONEY               33
      VI TOM ARRIVES IN PITTSBURG           42
     VII THE PITTSBURG HOUSE                51
    VIII GRAHAM IN HIS TRUE COLORS          59
      IX THE "RIVER BELLE"                  68
       X ON THE STEAMER                     76
      XI THE FIRST DAY ON THE RIVER         85
     XII NO. 61 AND NO. 62                  94
    XIII GRAHAM'S DISAPPOINTMENT           104
     XIV COMING TO AN UNDERSTANDING        113
      XV THE ALLEGHANY HOUSE               117
     XVI THE EVENTS OF A MORNING           122
    XVII TOM'S ARREST                      131
   XVIII TOM GETS OUT OF HIS DIFFICULTY    140
     XIX A MISSOURI TAVERN                 149
      XX ST. JOE                           158
     XXI HOW THINGS WENT ON AT HOME        167
    XXII THE YOUNG MAN FROM BOSTON         175
   XXIII MR. PEABODY'S TROUBLES            184
    XXIV A SAD SIGHT                       192
     XXV A NIGHT PANIC                     201
    XXVI MR. PEABODY IS WORSTED            209
   XXVII THE LOST HORSE                    217
  XXVIII INDIAN CASUISTRY                  221
    XXIX A RACE FOR LIFE                   230
     XXX TOM BECOMES AN INDIAN             234
    XXXI TOM GIVES A MAGICAL SOIREE        240
   XXXII TOM'S ESCAPE                      247




THE YOUNG ADVENTURER.




CHAPTER I.

MARK NELSON'S FAMILY.


"I wish I could pay off the mortgage on my farm," said Mark Nelson
soberly, taking his seat on the left of the fireplace, in the room where
his wife and family were assembled.

"Have you paid the interest, Mark?" asked his wife.

"Yes; I paid it this afternoon, and it has stripped me of money
completely. I have less than five dollars in my pocketbook toward buying
you and the children clothes for the winter."

"Never mind me," said his wife cheerfully. "I am pretty well provided
for."

"Why, mother," said Sarah, the oldest daughter, a girl of fourteen; "you
haven't had a new dress for a year."

"I have enough to last me till spring, at any rate," said the mother.

"You never buy anything for yourself."

"I don't go in rags, do I?" asked Mrs. Nelson, with a smile.

Mrs. Nelson had a happy disposition, which led her to accept
uncomplainingly, and even cheerfully, the sacrifices which, as the wife
of a farmer in poor circumstances, she was compelled to make.

"You are right, Sarah," said Mark Nelson. "Your mother never seems to
think of herself. She might have been much better off if she had not
married me."

The children did not understand this allusion. They had never been told
that their mother had received an offer from Squire Hudson, the
wealthiest man in the village, but had chosen instead to marry Mark
Nelson, whose only property was a small farm, mortgaged for half its
value. Her rejected admirer took the refusal hard, for, as much as it
was possible for him, he loved the prettiest girl in the village, as
Mary Dale was generally regarded. But Mary knew him to be cold and
selfish, and could not make up her mind to marry him. If she had done
so, she would now be living in the finest house in the village, with
the chance of spending the winter in New York or Boston, instead of
drudging in an humble home, where there was indeed enough to eat, but
little money for even necessary purposes. She had never regretted her
decision. Her husband, though poor, was generally respected and liked,
while the squire, though his money procured him a certain degree of
consideration, had no near or attached friends.

To Squire Hudson many in the village paid tribute; for he held mortgages
on twenty farms and buildings, and was strict in exacting prompt payment
of the interest semi-annually. It was he to whom Mark Nelson's farm was
mortgaged for two thousand dollars. The mortgage had originally been for
fifteen hundred dollars, but five years before it had been increased to
two thousand, which represented more than half the sum which it would
have fetched, if put up for sale. The interest on this sum amounted to a
hundred and twenty dollars a year, which Mark Nelson always found it
hard to raise. Could he have retained it in his hands, and devoted it to
the use of his family, it would have helped them wonderfully, with Mrs.
Nelson's good management.

Tom, the oldest boy, now approaching his sixteenth birthday, looked up
from a book he was reading. He was a bright-looking boy, with brown
hair, a ruddy complexion, and dark-blue eyes, who looked, and was, frank
and manly.

"What is the amount of your interest?" he asked.

"Sixty dollars every half-year, Tom. That is what I paid to Squire
Hudson this afternoon. It would have made us very comfortable, if I only
could have kept it."

"It would have done you more good than the squire," said Sarah.

"He has more money than he knows what to do with," said her father,
almost complainingly. "It seems hard that money should be so unevenly
distributed."

"Money is not happiness," said Mrs. Nelson quietly.

"No; but it helps to buy happiness."

"I don't think Squire Hudson is as happy a man as you, Mark."

Mark Nelson's face softened as he surveyed his wife and children.

"I am happy at home," he said, "and I don't think the squire is."

"I am sure he isn't," said Tom. "Mrs. Hudson is sour and ill-tempered,
and Sinclair--the only child--is a second edition of his mother. He is
the most unpopular boy in the village."

"Still," said the farmer, not quite convinced, "money is an important
element of happiness, and a farmer stands a very poor chance of
acquiring it. Tom, I advise you not to be a farmer."

"I don't mean to be if I can help it," said Tom. "I am ready for any
opening that offers. I hope some day to pay off the mortgage on the
farm, and make you a free man, father."

"Thank you for your good intentions, Tom; but two thousand dollars is a
large sum of money."

"I know it, father; but I was reading in a daily paper, not long since,
of a boy, as poor as myself, who was worth twenty-five thousand dollars
by the time he was thirty. Why shouldn't this happen to me?"

"Don't build castles in the air, Tom," said his mother sensibly.

"At least, mother, I may hope for good luck. I have been wanting to talk
to you both about my future prospects. I shall be sixteen next week,
and it is time I did something."

"You are doing something--working on the farm now, Tom."

"That don't count. Father advises me not to be a farmer, and I agree
with him. I think I am capable of making my way in the world in some
other way, where I can earn more money. There is Walter, who likes the
country, to stay with you."

Walter, the third child, was now twelve years of age, with decided
country tastes.

"I would like to be a farmer as well as anything," said Walter. "I like
the fresh air. I shouldn't like to be cooped up in a store, or to live
in the city. Let Tom go if he likes."

"I have no objection," said Mr. Nelson; "but I have neither money nor
influence to help him. He will have to make his own way."

"I am not afraid to try," said Tom courageously. "From this day I will
look out for a chance, if you and mother are willing."

"I shall not oppose your wishes, Tom," said Mrs. Nelson gravely, "though
it will be a sad day for me when you leave your home."

"That isn't the way to look at it, mother," said Tom. "If gold pieces
grew on currant bushes, it wouldn't be necessary for me to leave home
to make a living."

"I wish they did," said Harry, a boy nine years of age.

"What would you do then, Harry?" asked his brother, smiling.

"I would buy a velocipede and a pair of skates."

"I heard of a boy once who found a penny in the field, right under a
potato-vine," said Walter.

"I don't believe it," said Harry.

"It's true, for I was the boy."

"Where did it come from?"

"Tom put it there to fool me."

"Won't you put one there to fool me, Tom?" asked Harry.

"You are too smart, Harry," said Tom, laughing. "My pennies are too few
to try such experiments. I hope, by the time you are as old as Walter,
to give you something better."

The conversation drifted to other topics, with which we are not
concerned. Tom, however, did not forget it. He felt that an important
question had that evening been decided for him. He had only thought of
making a start for himself hitherto. Now he had broached the subject,
and received the permission of his father and mother. The world was all
before him where to choose. His available capital was small, it is true,
amounting only to thirty-seven cents and a jack-knife; but he had,
besides, a stout heart, a pair of strong hands, an honest face, and
plenty of perseverance--not a bad equipment for a young adventurer.




CHAPTER II.

TOM FINDS A WALLET.


Since the time of which I am writing, over sixty years have passed, for
it was in the year 1850 that Tom made up his mind to leave home and seek
a fortune. The papers were full of the new gold discoveries in the new
country which had recently been added to the great republic. Thousands
were hurrying to the land of gold; men who had been unfortunate at home,
or, though moderately well situated, were seized by the spirit of
adventure. At considerable sacrifice many raised the means of reaching
the new El Dorado, while others borrowed or appropriated the necessary
sum. Some, able to do neither, set out on a venture, determined to get
there in some way.

In the weekly paper, to which Mr. Nelson had for years been a
subscriber, Tom had read a good deal about California. His youthful
fancy had been wrought upon by the brilliant pictures of a land where a
penniless man might, if favored by fortune, secure a competence in a
twelvemonth, and he ardently wished that he, too, might have the chance
of going there. It was a wish, but not an expectation. It would cost at
least two hundred dollars to reach the Pacific coast, and there was no
hope of getting a tithe of that sum.

"If I could only go to California," thought Tom, "I would make my way
somehow; I would cheerfully work twelve hours a day. I don't see why a
boy can't dig gold, as well as a man. If somebody would lend me money
enough to get there, I could afford to pay high interest."

There was one man in Wilton who might lend him the money if he would.
That man was Squire Hudson. He always had money on hand in considerable
quantities, and two hundred dollars would be nothing to him. Tom would
not have dreamed of applying to him, however, but for a service which
just at this time he was able to render the squire.

Tom had been in search of huckleberries--for this was the season--when,
in a narrow country road, not much frequented, his attention was drawn
to an object lying in the road. His heart hounded with excitement when
he saw that it was a well-filled pocketbook. He was not long in securing
it.

Opening the wallet, he found it was absolutely stuffed with bank-bills,
some of large denomination. There were, besides, several papers, to
which he paid but little attention. They assured him, however, as he had
already surmised, that the wallet was the property of Squire Hudson.

"I wonder how much money there is here," thought Tom, with natural
curiosity.

He stepped into the woods to avoid notice, and carefully counted the
bills. There were two hundred-dollar bills, and three fifties, and so
many of smaller denominations that Tom found the whole to amount to five
hundred and sixty-seven dollars.

"Almost six hundred dollars!" ejaculated Tom, in excitement, for he had
never seen so much money before. "How happy should I be if I had as much
money! How rich the squire is! He ought to be a happy man."

Then the thought stole into our hero's mind, that the wallet contained
nearly three times as much as he would need to take him to California.

"If it were only mine!" he thought to himself.

Perhaps Tom ought to have been above temptation, but he was not. For one
little instant he was tempted to take out two hundred dollars, and then
drop the wallet where he had picked it up. No one would probably find
out where the missing money was. But Tom had been too well brought up to
yield to this temptation. Not even the thought that he might, perhaps
within a year, return the money with interest, prevailed upon him.

"It wouldn't be honest," he decided, "and if I began in that way I could
not expect that God would prosper me. If that is the only way by which I
can go to California I must make up my mind to stay at home."

So the question was settled in Tom's mind. The money must be returned to
the owner. His pail was nearly full of huckleberries, but he postponed
going home, for he felt that Squire Hudson would be feeling anxious
about his loss, and he thought it his duty to go and return the money
first of all. Accordingly he made his way directly to the imposing
residence of the rich man.

Passing up the walk which led to the front door, Tom rang the bell. This
was answered by a cross-looking servant. She glanced at the pail of
berries, and said quickly: "We don't want any berries, and if we did you
ought to go round to the side door."

"I haven't asked you to buy any berries, have I?" said Tom, rather
provoked by the rudeness of the girl, when he had come to do the squire
a favor.

"No, but that's what you're after. We have bought all we want."

"I tell you I didn't come here to sell berries," said Tom independently;
"I picked these for use at home."

"Then what do you come here for, anyway, takin' up my time wid comin' to
the door, when I'm busy gettin' supper?"

"I want to see Squire Hudson."

"I don't know if he's at home."

"Then you'd better find out, and not keep me waiting."

"I never see such impudence," ejaculated the girl.

"I mean what I say," continued Tom stoutly. "I want to see the squire on
important business."

"Much business you have wid him!" said the girl scornfully.

Tom by this time was out of patience.

"Go and tell your master that I wish to see him," he said firmly.

"I've a great mind to slam the door in your face," returned Bridget
angrily.

"I wouldn't advise you to," said Tom calmly.

A stop was put to the contention by an irritable voice.

"What's all this, hey? Who's at the door, Bridget?"

"A boy wid berries, sir."

"Tell him I don't want any."

"I have told him, and he won't go."

"Won't go, hey?" and Squire Hudson came out into the hall. "What's all
this, I say? Won't go?"

"I wish to see you, sir," said Tom, undaunted. "I have told the girl
that I didn't come here to sell berries; but she objects to my seeing
you."

Squire Hudson was far from an amiable man, and this explanation made him
angry with the servant. He turned upon her fiercely.

"What do you mean, you trollop," he demanded, "by refusing to let the
boy see me? What do you mean by your insolence, I say?"

Bridget was overwhelmed, for the squire's temper was like a tornado.

"I thought he wanted to sell berries," she faltered.

"That isn't true," said Tom. "I told you expressly that I picked the
berries for use at home, and had none to sell."

"Go back to the kitchen, you trollop!" thundered the squire. "You
deserve to go to jail for your outrageous conduct."

Bridget did not venture to answer a word, for it would only have raised
a more violent storm, but retreated crestfallen to her own realm, and
left our hero in possession of the field. She contented herself with
muttering under her breath what she did not dare to speak aloud.

"You are Tom Nelson, are you not?" asked the squire, adjusting his
spectacles, and looking more carefully at the boy.

"Yes, sir."

"Have you any message from your father?"

"No, sir."

"Then why did you come here to take up my time?" demanded the squire,
frowning.

"I came to do you a service, Squire Hudson."

"You came--to--do--me--a--service?" repeated the squire slowly.

"Yes, sir."

"You may as well come in," said the rich man, leading into the
sitting-room.

Tom followed him into a handsomely furnished room, and the two sat down
opposite each other.




CHAPTER III.

TOM ASKS A LOAN.


"I don't know what service you can do me," said Squire Hudson
incredulously.

His manner implied: "I am a rich man and you are a poor boy. How can you
possibly serve me?"

"Have you lost anything lately?" inquired Tom, coming at once to
business.

I suppose most men, when asked such a question, would first think of
their pocket-books. It was so with Squire Hudson. He hastily thrust his
hand into his pocket, and found--a large hole, through which, doubtless,
the wallet had slipped.

"I have lost my wallet," he said anxiously. "Have you found it?"

In reply Tom produced the missing article. The squire took it hurriedly,
and, at once opening it, counted the money. It was all there, and he
heaved a sigh of relief, for he was a man who cared for money more than
most people.

"Where did you find it?" he asked.

Tom answered the question.

"It is very fortunate you came along before anyone else saw it. I rode
that way on horse-back this morning. I told Mrs. Hudson that my pocket
needed repairing, but she put it off, according to her usual custom. If
it had not been found, I would have kept her on short allowance for a
year to come."

Tom felt rather embarrassed, for, of course, it would not do to join in
with the squire in his complaints of his wife. Suddenly Squire Hudson
said, eying him keenly: "Do you know how much money there is in this
wallet?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then you counted it?"

"Yes, sir."

"Why did you do it?"

"I wanted to know how much there was, so that no one might blame me if
any were missing."

"Didn't you want to take any?" asked the squire bluntly.

"Yes," answered Tom promptly.

"Why didn't you? For fear you would be found out?"

"That may have had something to do with it, but it was principally
because it would have been stealing and stealing is wrong."

"What would you have done with the money if you had taken it?"

"Started for California next week," answered Tom directly.

"Eh?" ejaculated the squire, rather astonished. "Why do you want to go
to California--a boy like you?"

"To dig gold. I suppose a boy can dig gold, as well as a man. There
doesn't seem to be much chance for me here. There's nothing to do but to
work on the farm, and father and Walter can do all there is to be done
there."

"How is your father getting along?" asked the rich man, with an interest
which rather surprised Tom.

"Poorly," said Tom. "He makes both ends meet; but we all have to do
without a great many things that we need."

The squire looked thoughtful. He took half a dollar from his wallet and
tendered it to Tom.

"You've done me a service," he said. "Take that."

Tom drew back.

"I would rather not take money for being honest," he said.

"That's all nonsense," said Squire Hudson sharply.

"That's the way I feel about it," said Tom stoutly.

"Then you're a fool."

"I hope not, sir."

"This would have been quite a large loss to me. I am perfectly willing
to give you this money."

Then Tom gathered courage and said boldly, "You can do me a great favor,
Squire Hudson, if you choose."

"What is it?"

"Lend me enough money to go to California," said Tom nervously.

"Good gracious! Is the boy crazy?" ejaculated the astonished squire.

"No, sir, I am not crazy. I'll tell you what my plans are. I shall go to
work directly I get there, and shall devote the first money I make to
paying you. Of course, I shall expect to pay high interest. I am willing
to pay you three hundred dollars for two; unless I am sick, I think I
can do it inside of twelve months."

"How much money do you suppose you will need for this wild-goose
expedition?"

"About two hundred dollars, sir; and, as I just said, I will give you my
note for three."

"A boy's note is worth nothing."

"Perhaps it isn't in law; but I wouldn't rest till it was paid back."

"What security have you to offer?"

"None, sir, except my word."

"Do you know what I would be if I lent you this money?"

"You would be very kind."

"Pish! I should be a fool."

"I don't think you'd lose anything by it, sir; but, of course, I can't
blame you for refusing," and Tom rose to go.

"Sit down again," said the squire; "I want to talk to you about this
matter. How long have you been thinking of California?"

"Only two or three days, sir."

"What made you think of it?"

"I wanted to help father."

"Who has told you about California?"

"I have read about it in the papers."

"Have you spoken to your father about going there?"

"I have spoken to him about leaving home, and seeking my fortune; but I
have not mentioned going to California, because I thought it impossible
to raise the necessary money."

"Of course. That's sensible, at least."

Squire Hudson rose and walked thoughtfully about the room, occasionally
casting a keen glance at Tom, who remained sitting, with his pail of
huckleberries in his cap.

After a while the squire spoke again.

"Your father might let you have the money," he suggested.

"My father has no money to spare," said Tom quickly.

"Couldn't he raise some?"

"I don't know how."

"Then I'll tell you. I hold a mortgage for two thousand dollars on his
farm. I suppose you know that?"

"Yes, sir."

"I might be willing to increase the mortgage to twenty-two hundred, and
he could lend you the extra two hundred."

This was a new idea to Tom, and he took a little time to think it over.

"I don't like to ask father to do that," he said. "He finds it very hard
now to pay the interest on the mortgage."

"I thought you intended to pay the money in a year," said the squire
sharply.

"So I do," said Tom, and he began to think more favorably of the plan.

"In that case your father wouldn't suffer."

"You are right, sir. If father would only consent to do so, I would be
happy. But I might die."

"Your father would have to take the risk of that. You can't expect me
to."

This seemed fair enough, and, in fact, the danger didn't seem very
great to Tom. He was about sixteen; and to a boy of sixteen death seems
very far off, provided he is strong and vigorous, as Tom was. He rapidly
decided that the squire's offer was not to be refused without careful
consideration. It opened to him a career which looked bright and
promising. Once in California, what could he not do? Tom was hopeful and
sanguine, and did not allow himself to think of failure.

"I understand that you are willing to advance the money, Squire Hudson?"
he said, determined to know just what to depend upon.

"I will advance two hundred dollars, on condition that your father will
secure me by an increased mortgage. It is no particular object to me,
for I can readily invest the money in some other way."

"I will speak to father about it, Squire Hudson, and meanwhile I am
thankful to you for making the offer."

"Very well. Let me know as soon as possible," said the squire
carelessly.

As Tom went out, the rich man soliloquized: "I have no faith in the
boy's scheme, and I don't believe half the stories they tell about the
California mines; but it will give me an extra hold on Nelson, and
hasten the day when the farm will come into my hands. When Mary Nelson
refused my hand I resolved some day to have my revenge. I have waited
long, but it will come at last. When she and her children are paupers,
she may regret the slight she put upon me."




CHAPTER IV.

TOM ASKS LEAVE OF ABSENCE.


Tom walked home slowly, but the distance seemed short, for he was
absorbed in thought. In a way very unexpected he seemed to be likely to
realize what he had regarded as a very pleasant, but impossible, dream.
Would his father consent to the squire's proposal, and, if so, ought Tom
to consent to expose him to the risk of losing so considerable a sum of
money? If he had been older and more cautious he would probably have
decided in the negative; but Tom was hopeful and sanguine, and the
stories he had heard of California had dazzled him. There was, of
course, an element of uncertainty in his calculations, but the fact
that there seemed to be no prospect before him in his native village had
an important influence in shaping his decision.

To ask his father the momentous question, however, was not easy, and he
delayed it, hoping for a favorable opportunity of introducing the
subject. His thoughtful manner excited attention, and secured him the
opportunity he sought.

"You seem deep in thought, Tom," said his mother.

"Yes, mother, I have a good deal to think about."

"Anybody would think Tom overwhelmed with business," said Walter, next
to Tom in age, with good-humored banter.

"I am," said Tom gravely.

"Won't you take me in partnership, then?" asked Walter.

Tom smiled.

"I don't think I could do that," he answered. "Not to keep you waiting,
Squire Hudson has made me a business proposal this afternoon."

All were surprised and looked to Tom for an explanation.

"He offers to advance me two hundred dollars for a year, to help me out
to California."

"Squire Hudson makes this offer to a boy of your age?" said his father
slowly.

"Yes, or rather he makes the offer to you."

"To me?"

"Perhaps you will think me selfish for even mentioning it," said Tom
rapidly, in a hurry to explain fully now that the ice was broken. "He
will advance the money, on condition that you increase the mortgage on
the farm to twenty-two hundred dollars."

Mr. Nelson looked blank.

"Do you know, Tom," he said, "how hard I find it now to pay the interest
on the mortgage, and how hopeless I am of ever paying it off?"

"I know all that, father; but I want to help you. If I keep my health,
and have a chance, I think I can help you. There's no chance for me
here, and there is a chance in California. You remember what we have
read in the _Weekly Messenger_ about the gold-fields, and what large
sums have been realized by miners."

"They are men, and you are a boy."

"That's true," said Tom, "but," he added, with natural pride, "I am
pretty strong for a boy. I am willing to work, and I don't see why I
can't dig gold as well as a man. I may not make as much, but if I only
do half as well as some that we have read about, I can do a good deal
for you."

"How far off is California?" asked Mrs. Nelson.

"Over three thousand miles, across the continent," answered her husband.
"By sea it is a good deal more."

"Why, it is as far off as Europe," said Walter, who was fresh from his
lesson in geography.

"It is farther than some parts of Europe--England, for example," said
his father.

"And a wild, unsettled region," said Mrs. Nelson soberly.

"I don't think so much of that," said Mark Nelson. "Tom is no baby. He
is a boy of good sense, not heedless, like some of his age, and I should
feel considerable confidence in his getting along well."

"What, Mark, are you in favor of his going so far--a boy who has never
been away from home in his life?"

"I don't know what to say. I have not had time to consider the matter,
as it has come upon me suddenly. I have a good deal of confidence in
Tom, but there is one difficulty in my mind."

"What is that, father?" asked Tom anxiously.

"The expense of getting to California, and the method of raising the
money; I don't like to increase the mortgage."

"I suppose you are right, father," said Tom slowly. "I know it is more
than I have any right to ask. I wouldn't even have mentioned it if I
hadn't hoped to help you to pay it back."

"That is understood, Tom," said his father kindly. "I know you mean what
you say, and that you would redeem your promise if fortune, or rather
Providence, permitted. It is a serious matter, however, and not to be
decided in a hurry. We will speak of it again."

Nothing more was said about Tom's plan till after the children had gone
to bed. Then, as Mark Nelson and his wife sat before the fire in the
open fireplace, the subject was taken up anew.

"Mary," said Mark, "I am beginning to think favorably of Tom's
proposal."

"How can you say so, Mark?" interrupted his wife. "It seems like madness
to send a young boy so far away."

"Tom can't be called a young boy; he is now sixteen."

"But he has never been away from home."

"He must go some time."

"If it were only to Boston or New York; but to go more than three
thousand miles away!" and the mother shuddered.

"There are dangers as great in Boston or New York as in California,
Mary, to a boy of Tom's age. He can't always be surrounded by home
influences."

"I wish we could find employment for him in town," said Mrs. Nelson
uneasily.

"That is a mother's thought, and it would be pleasant for all of us; but
I doubt if it would be better for Tom."

"Why not?"

"A boy who is thrown upon his own guardianship and his own resources
develops manliness and self-reliance sooner than at home. But we need
not take that into consideration; there is nothing to do here, nor is
there likely to be. He must go away from home to find employment. To
obtain a place in Boston or New York requires influence and friends in
those places; and we can hope for neither. In California he will become
his own employer. The gold-mines are open to all, and he may earn in a
year as much as he could in five years in the East."

"Do you favor his going, then, Mark?"

"Not against your will, Mary. Indeed, I should not feel justified in
increasing the mortgage upon our little property against your wish. That
concerns us all."

"I don't think so much of that. I am so afraid Tom would get sick in
California. What would become of the poor boy in that case?"

"That is a mother's thought. I think Tom would find friends, who would
not let him suffer. He is a manly, attractive boy, though he is ours,
and I think he is well calculated to make his way."

"That he is," said his mother proudly. "No one can help liking Tom."

"Then you see he is likely to find friends. Were he such a boy as
Sinclair Hudson, I should feel afraid that he would fare badly, if he
stood in need of help from others. Sinclair is certainly a very
disagreeable boy."

"Yes, he is; and he isn't half as smart as Tom."

"A mother's vanity," said Mark Nelson, smiling. "However, you are right
there. I should consider it a misfortune to have such a cross-grained,
selfish son as Sinclair. Squire Hudson, with all his wealth, is not
fortunate in his only child. There is considerable resemblance between
father and son. I often wish that some one else than the squire held the
mortgage on our farm."

"You don't think he would take advantage of you?"

"I don't think he would be very lenient to me if I failed to pay
interest promptly. He has a grudge against me, you know."

"That is nonsense," said Mrs. Nelson, blushing, for she understood the
allusion.

"I am glad he doesn't ask me to give him a mortgage on you, Mary."

"He has forgotten all that," said Mrs. Nelson. "I am no longer young and
pretty."

"I think you more attractive than ever," said the husband.

"Because you are foolish," said his wife; but she was well pleased,
nevertheless. Poor as her husband was, she had never dreamed of
regretting her choice.

"Be it so; but about this affair of Tom--what shall I say to him in the
morning?"

Mrs. Nelson recovered her gravity instantly.

"Decide as you think right, Mark," she said. "If you judge that Tom had
better go I will do my best to become reconciled to his absence, and set
about getting him ready."

"It is a great responsibility, Mary," said Mark slowly; "but I accept
it. Let the boy go, if he wishes. He will leave our care, but we can
trust him to the care of his heavenly Father, who will be as near to him
in California as at home."

Thus Tom's future was decided. His father and mother retired to bed, but
not to sleep. They were parting already in imagination with their
first-born, and the thought of that parting was sad indeed.




CHAPTER V.

TOM RAISES THE MONEY.


Tom got up early the next morning--in fact, he was up first in the
house--and attended to his usual "chores." He was splitting wood when
his father passed him on the way to the barn with the milk-pail in his
hand.

"You are up early, Tom," he said.

"Yes," answered our hero.

Tom could not help wondering whether his father had come to any decision
about letting him go to California; but he did not like to ask. In due
time he would learn, of course. He felt that he should like to have it
decided one way or the other. While his plans were in doubt he felt
unsettled and nervous.

At an early hour the family gathered about the breakfast table. Tom
noticed that his father and mother looked grave, and spoke in a subdued
tone, as if they had something on their minds; but he did not know what
to infer from this, except that they had his prospects still in
consideration.

When breakfast was over, Mark Nelson pushed back his chair, and said:
"How soon can you get Tom ready to start, Mary?"

"Am I going, father?" asked Tom, his heart giving an eager bound.

"Is Tom really going?" asked the younger children, with scarcely less
eagerness.

"If Squire Hudson doesn't go back on his promise. Tom, you can go with
me to the squire's."

"How soon?"

"In about an hour. He doesn't breakfast as early as we do. I think he
will be ready to receive us in about an hour."

"Thank you, father," said Tom. "You are doing a great deal for me."

"I can't do much for you, my boy. I can probably get you to California,
and then you will be thrown upon your own exertions."

"I mean to work very hard. I think I shall succeed."

"I hope so, at least, Tom. When the time comes to start the other boys,
I shall be glad to have your help in doing it."

Tom was pleased to hear this, though it placed upon his shoulders a new
and heavy responsibility. He was assuming the responsibility not only
for his own future, but for that of his brothers. But it made him feel
more manly, as if the period of his dependent boyhood were over, and he
had become a young man all at once.

"I hope I sha'n't disappoint you, father," he said.

"If you do, I don't think it will be your fault, Tom," said his father
kindly. "Fortune may be against you, but we must take the risk of that."

"I don't know what to think about it, Tom," said his mother, in a tone
of doubt and mental disturbance. "I feel as if you were too young to go
out in the wide world to seek your fortune."

"I am not so very young, mother. I am old enough to make my way."

"So your father says, and I have yielded to his judgment; but, Tom, I
don't know how to let you go."

There were tears in Mrs. Nelson's eyes as she spoke. Tom was moved, and
if he needed anything to strengthen him in the good resolutions he had
formed, his mother's emotion supplied it.

"You sha'n't regret giving your consent, mother," he said manfully, and,
rising from his seat, he went to his mother and kissed her.

"Mary," said Mr. Nelson, "you haven't answered my question. How long
will it take to get Tom ready? If he is to go, he may as well start as
soon as possible."

"Let me see," said Mrs. Nelson, "how many shirts have you got, Tom?"

"Five."

"Are they all in good order?"

"I believe one needs mending."

"I don't know whether that will be enough," said Mrs. Nelson doubtfully.

"Mary," said her husband, "don't provide too large a supply of clothing.
Tom may find it a burden. Remember, in California, he will have to
travel on foot and carry his own baggage."

"Then I think he is already pretty well provided. But some of his
clothes may need mending. That won't take long, and I will attend to it
at once."

"Perhaps Squire Hudson will go back on you, after all," said Walter.

Tom's face was overcast. That would be a disappointment he could not
easily bear.

"I shall soon know," he said.

An hour later Tom and his father set out for Squire Hudson's residence.
Tom felt nervous; he could not well help it.

"Tom," said his father, "this is an important visit for you."

"Yes, sir," said Tom.

"You are feeling nervous, I see. Try to take it coolly, and don't feel
too low-spirited if things don't turn out as you hope."

"I will try to follow your advice, father, but I am not sure as I can."

"If you are disappointed, try to think it is for the best. A boy of your
age had made all arrangements to visit Europe with a party of friends.
The day before starting something happened which made it impossible for
him to go. For weeks he had been looking forward with eager anticipation
to his journey, and now it was indefinitely postponed."

"What a terrible disappointment!" said Tom.

"Yes, it seemed so, but mark the issue. The steamer was lost, and all on
board were drowned. The disappointment saved his life."

"It might not always turn out so," objected Tom.

"No, that is true. Still, if we are willing to think that our
disappointments are not always misfortunes, we shall go through life
with more cheerfulness and content."

"Still, I hope I shall not be disappointed in this," said Tom.

"You are perhaps too young to be philosophical," said his father.

Mark Nelson had enjoyed only the usual advantages of education afforded
by a common school; but he was a man of good natural capacity, and more
thoughtful than many in his vocation. From him Tom inherited good
natural abilities and industrious habits. It would not be fair, however,
to give all the credit to his father. Mrs. Nelson was a superior woman,
and all her children were well endowed by nature.

As they turned into Squire Hudson's gravel-path, the squire himself
opened the front door.

"Were you coming to see me?" he asked.

"We would like to speak with you a few minutes, squire, if you can spare
the time."

"Oh, yes, I have nothing pressing on hand," said the squire, with
unusual affability. "Walk in, Mr. Nelson."

He led the way into the room where Tom had had his interview with him
the day before.

"Your son did me a good turn yesterday," he said graciously. "He behaved
in a very creditable manner."

"He told me that he found your pocketbook, Squire Hudson."

"Yes; it contained a large sum of money. Some boys would have kept it."

"None of my boys would," said Mark Nelson proudly.

"Of course not. They're too well brought up."

"Tom told me that you offered to advance money enough to get him to
California," said Mr. Nelson, coming to business.

"On satisfactory security," added the squire cautiously.

"You proposed to increase the mortgage on my place?"

"Yes," said the squire. "I wouldn't have done it, though, Neighbor
Nelson, but for the good turn the boy did me. I am not at all particular
about increasing the amount of the mortgage, but, if by so doing it I
can promote Tom's views, I won't object."

"Thank you, sir," said Tom gratefully.

"It is a serious step for me to take," continued Mr. Nelson, "for I feel
the incumbrance to be a heavy one already. In fact, it is with
difficulty that I pay the interest. But the time has come when Tom
should start in life, and in this village there seems to be no
opening."

"None whatever," said the squire, in a tone of decision.

"What do you think of the prospects in California?" asked Mark Nelson.
"You are a man of business, and can judge better than I. Are the stories
we hear of fortunes made in a short time to be relied upon?"

"As to that," said the squire deliberately, "I suppose we can't believe
all we hear; we must make some allowances. But, after all, there's no
doubt of the existence of gold in large quantities; I am satisfied of
that."

"Then about the wisdom of sending out a boy like Tom, alone; do you
think it best?"

"It depends altogether on the boy," responded the squire. "If he is
honest, industrious, and energetic, he will make his way. You know your
own boy better than I do."

"He is all you say, Squire Hudson. I have a great deal of confidence in
Tom."

Tom looked at his father gratefully. Sometimes it does a boy good to
learn that the older people have confidence in him.

"Then let him go," said the squire. "I stand ready to furnish the money.
I think you said you needed two hundred dollars."

This question was put to Tom, and the boy answered in the affirmative.

"Very well," said the squire. "As soon as the necessary writings are
made out, the money shall be ready."

"It's all settled!" thought Tom triumphantly.

At that moment Sinclair Hudson, the squire's only son, opened the door
and looked into the room.

"Hello, Tom Nelson," said he, rather rudely. "What brings you here?"




CHAPTER VI.

TOM ARRIVES IN PITTSBURG.


"I came on business, Sinclair," answered Tom, smiling.

"Thomas is going to California, Sinclair," explained Squire Hudson.

Sinclair opened wide his eyes in amazement. "What for?" he asked.

"To dig gold and make my fortune," answered Tom complacently.

"Come out and tell me all about it."

"You can go, Thomas," said Squire Hudson graciously. "Your father and I
will settle the business."

"Is it true that you are going to California?" asked Sinclair, when they
were out in the front yard.

"Yes."

"How soon do you go?"

"I want to get away in a week."

"What has my father to do with it?" inquired Sinclair.

"He is going to lend me the money to get there."

"How much?"

"Two hundred dollars."

"Then he is a greater fool than I thought," said Sinclair, with
characteristic politeness.

"Why do you say that?" demanded our hero, justly nettled.

"Because he'll never see the money again."

"Yes, he will. My father is responsible for it."

"Your father is a poor man."

"He is able to pay that, if I don't; but I hope he won't have to."

"Do you really expect to find gold?" asked Sinclair curiously.

"Certainly I do. Others have, and why shouldn't I? I am willing to work
hard."

"Do you think you'll come home rich?"

"I hope so."

"I have a great mind to ask father to let me go with you," said Sinclair
unexpectedly.

"You wouldn't like it. You haven't been brought up to work," said Tom,
rather startled, and not much pleased with the proposal, for Sinclair
Hudson was about the last boy he wished as a companion.

"Oh, I wouldn't go to work. I would go as a gentleman, to see the
country. Wait a minute; I will run in and ask him."

So Sinclair ran into the house, and preferred his request.

"That's a wild idea, Sinclair," said his father quickly.

"Why is it? I'm as old as Tom Nelson."

"He is going because it is necessary for him to earn his living."

"He will have a splendid time," grumbled the spoiled son.

"You shall travel all you want to when you are older," said his father.
"Now you must get an education."

"I want to travel now."

"I will take you to New York the next time I go."

"Give me five dollars besides."

The money was handed him.

He went out and reported to Tom that he was going to travel all over the
world when he was a little older, and had decided not to go to
California now.

"If you have money enough you can go with me," he added graciously.

"Thank you," said Tom politely, though the prospect of having Sinclair
for a traveling companion did not exhilarate him much.

For a few days Mrs. Nelson was very busy getting Tom ready to go. It was
well, perhaps, that so much needed to be done, for it kept her mind from
the thought of the separation.

The question of which route to take, whether by steamer or across the
plains, demanded consideration. It was finally decided that Tom should
go overland. It was thought he might join some company at St. Joseph--or
St. Joe, as it was then, and is now, popularly called--and pay his
passage in services, thus saving a good share of the two hundred
dollars. That was, of course, an important consideration.

"How shall I carry my money?" asked Tom.

"It will be best to take gold, and carry it for safety in a belt around
your waist," said his father. "You must be very prudent and careful, or
you may be robbed. That would be a serious thing for you, as I could not
forward you any more money."

"I will be very prudent, father," said Tom. "I know the value of money
too well to risk losing it."

Well, the days of preparation were over at length, and Tom stood on the
threshold, bidding good-by to his parents and his brothers and sisters.
He had not realized till now what it was to leave home on a long journey
of indefinite duration. He wanted to be heroic, but in spite of himself
his eyes moistened, and he came near breaking down.

"I don't know how to part with you, my dear child," said his mother.

"Think that it is all for the best, mother," said Tom, choking. "Think
of the time when I will come back with plenty of money."

"God bless you, Tom!" said his father. "Don't forget your good habits
and principles when you are far away from us."

"I won't, father."

So Tom's long journey commenced.

Tom's plan was to go to St. Louis first. His father made some inquiries
about the route, and recommended going to Pittsburg by cars, then to
take the boat on the Ohio River for Cincinnati. This seemed to Tom to
afford a pleasant variety, and he gladly accepted the suggestion.

As they were approaching Pittsburg, Tom occupied a whole seat on the
left-hand side of the car. A brisk, plausible young man, of twenty-five,
passing through the aisle, observed the vacant seat, and, pausing,
inquired, "Is this seat engaged?"

"No, sir," answered Tom.

"Then, if you have no objection, I will occupy it."

"Certainly, sir."

The young man was nicely dressed. In his bosom sparkled a diamond pin,
and he wore three or four rings on his fingers.

"He must be rich," thought Tom, who was of an observant turn.

"A pleasant day to travel," remarked the young man affably.

"Yes, it is," said Tom.

"Do you go farther than Pittsburg?"

"Yes, I am going to California," answered Tom proudly.

"Is it possible? Are you alone?"

"Yes, sir."

"You are young to travel so far."

"I am sixteen; that is, I shall be in two or three weeks."

"Still, you are young to take such a journey alone. Are you going to
join friends there?"

"No; I am going to seek my fortune."

Once more the young man looked surprised, and scanned Tom curiously.

"I presume you are from the city," he observed, with a smile which Tom
would not have understood if he had noticed it. The truth is, that Tom
bore evident marks of being a country boy. I don't like to say that he
looked "green," but he certainly lacked the air that distinguishes a
town-bred boy. His companion evidently understood boy nature, for Tom
was much flattered by the supposition that he was a city boy.

"No," he answered, almost as if apologizing for a discreditable fact;
"I am from the country."

"You don't say so!" exclaimed the other, in apparent surprise. "I
thought, from your appearance, that you were from the city. How do you
go from Pittsburg?"

"By river to Cincinnati."

"Do you really? I am glad to hear it; I am going there myself. We shall
be fellow passengers. That will be pleasant."

Tom thought it would. His companion seemed very pleasant and social, and
he had been feeling lonely, as was only natural.

"Yes, it will," he said.

"By the way, as we may be thrown together, more or less, we ought to
know each other. My name is Milton Graham. My father is a rich merchant
in New York. I am traveling partly on business for my father's firm, and
partly for pleasure."

"My name is Thomas Nelson; most people call me Tom," said our hero.

"Then I will call you Tom," said Graham. "I like the name. I have a
favorite cousin named Tom. Poor boy!--he is an orphan. His father died
two years ago, leaving him two hundred thousand dollars. My father is
his guardian. He is about your age; only not quite so good-looking."

Tom blushed. He had not thought much of his own looks, but he was human,
and no one is displeased at being considered good-looking. Mr. Graham
spoke meditatively, as if he was not intending to pay a compliment, only
mentioning a fact, and Tom did not feel called upon to thank him for
this flattering remark.

"That is a great deal of money," he said.

"Yes, it is. All my relations are rich; that is, except one uncle, who
probably is not worth over twenty thousand dollars."

Tom was impressed. A man who could talk of such a sum in such terms must
certainly be very rich.

"Do you know, Mr. Graham," he inquired, "how soon the steamer will start
after we reach Pittsburg?"

"No; but I can find out after we reach there."

On arriving at Pittsburg, inquiry was made, and it was ascertained that
the steamer _River Belle_ would leave at nine o'clock the following
morning.

"We shall have to go to a hotel," said Graham.

"Is there any cheap hotel here?" asked Tom prudently.

"Yes; there is the Pittsburg House. Suppose we both go there."

"All right."

Mr. Graham had only a small carpetbag, smaller than Tom's. They took
them in their hands, and walked for a short distance, till they reached
a plain building, which, from the sign, Tom discovered to be the hotel
which had been mentioned.

"Shall we room together? It will cost less," said Milton Graham
carelessly.

"If you please," said Tom.

He was lonely and thought he would like company. Besides, it would be
cheaper, and that was a weighty consideration.




CHAPTER VII.

THE PITTSBURG HOUSE.


Tom and his companion entered the hotel. At the left was the clerk's
desk. Milton Graham naturally took the lead. He took a pen from the
clerk, and entered his name with a flourish. Then he handed the pen to
Tom, who followed his example, omitting the flourish, however.

"This young gentleman will room with me," said Graham.

"All right, sir," said the clerk. "Will you go up to your room now?"

"Yes."

The porter was summoned, and handed the key of No. 16. He took the two
carpetbags, and led the way up-stairs, for the Pittsburg House had no
elevator. Even in the best hotels at that time this modern convenience
was not to be found.

The door of No. 16 was opened, revealing a plain room, about twelve feet
square, provided, as Tom was glad to see, with two narrow beds.

"Have you got a quarter, Tom?" asked Graham.

Tom drew one from his pocket.

Graham took it and handed it to the porter, who expressed his thanks.

"It's always customary to fee the porter," he said carelessly, in answer
to Tom's look of surprise.

"What for?"

"For bringing up the baggage."

"Twenty-five cents for bringing up two small carpetbags! That's pretty
high. I'd have brought them up myself, if I had known," said Tom,
dissatisfied, for he felt that this fee was hardly in accordance with
his resolutions of economy.

"Oh, he expects it. It's his regular perquisite. When you've traveled
more you'll understand."

"How much are we to pay for our accommodations?" asked Tom anxiously.

"About two dollars apiece, I reckon."

"That's more than I can afford," said Tom, alarmed.

"Perhaps it is less, as we room together."

"I hope so, for I can't afford to be extravagant."

"Do you call two dollars a day extravagant?" asked Graham, smiling.

"It is for me. My father is poor."

"Oh, it'll be all right. I'll fix it with the clerk. If you are ready,
suppose we go down and have some supper."

To this Tom had no objection. He washed his hands and face, and brushed
his hair; then he declared himself ready.

Tom was hungry, and did justice to the supper, which he found very good.
As they left the table, and reentered the office of the hotel, Milton
Graham said, "I am going to make a call on some friends. Sorry to leave
you, but we shall meet later in the evening."

"All right," said Tom.

On the whole he did not regret being alone. He began to doubt whether
Graham would make a desirable traveling companion. Tom felt the need of
economy, and he saw that his companion would make it difficult. If a fee
must be paid, it was fair to divide it; but the porter's fee had come
out of Tom's pocket.

"Didn't he have a quarter, I wonder?" thought our hero.

It was a small matter, but economy must begin in small matters, or it is
not likely to be practised at all.

He took the opportunity to go to the desk and ascertain the sum likely
to be charged for his accommodations.

"How long do you stay?" asked the clerk pleasantly.

"Till to-morrow morning. I am going to sail in the _River Belle_."

"Then we shall charge you a dollar and a half."

This seemed large to Tom, but he made no objection.

"How much would it have been if I had roomed alone?" he asked.

"The same. We make no change in our terms on that account."

"Mr. Graham told me it would be cheaper to room together."

"He is your roommate, isn't he?"

"Yes, sir."

"He is mistaken, so far as our house is concerned. I suppose you have
known him for some time."

"No, sir. I met him on the cars yesterday afternoon for the first time."

"Then you don't know anything about him?"

"Oh, yes," answered Tom. "He is the son of a rich merchant in New York."

"Who told you that?"

"He did."

The clerk was a man of middle age. At home he had a son of Tom's age,
and this led him to feel a friendly interest in our hero.

"I suppose you have never traveled much," he said.

"No, sir. This is my first journey."

"Are you going far?"

"To California."

"That is a long journey for a boy of your age," said the clerk, looking
surprised.

"Yes, sir; but I can't get anything to do at home, and I am going to
California to seek my fortune."

"I hope you will be successful," said the clerk, with hearty sympathy.
"Will you let me give you a piece of advice?"

"I shall be very glad of it, sir," responded Tom. "I find I am quite
inexperienced."

"Then don't trust strangers too readily. It is dangerous."

"Do you refer to Mr. Graham?" asked Tom, startled.

"Yes, I refer to him, or any other chance acquaintance."

"Don't you think he is all right?" asked our hero anxiously.

"I don't think he is the son of a rich merchant in New York."

"Then why should he tell me so?"

Tom was green, and I have no intention of concealing it.

"I can't tell what his designs may be. Did you tell him that you were
going to California?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then he will, of course, conclude that you have money. Did you tell him
where you keep it?"

"No, sir. I keep it in a belt around my waist."

"You are too ready to tell that, though with me the information is safe.
You are to room together. What will be easier, then, for your companion
to rob you during the night?"

"I'd better take a room alone," said Tom, now thoroughly alarmed.

"I should advise you to, in most cases, but at present it may be as well
to let things remain as they are, as it will save an awkward
explanation."

"But I don't want to be robbed."

"We have a safe in the office--there it is--in which we deposit articles
of value intrusted to us by our guests. Then we become responsible for
them. I advise you to leave your money with us overnight."

"I will," said Tom, relieved. "I shall have to go to my room to remove
it."

"Very well. If you have a watch, or any other valuable, it will be well
to put those in our charge also."

"No, sir, I have nothing of consequence but the money."

The belt of money was deposited in the safe, and Tom felt relieved. He
began to realize for the first time the need of prudence and caution. It
had never occurred to him that a nice, gentlemanly-looking man, like
Milton Graham, was likely to rob him of his scanty means. Even now he
thought there must be some mistake. Still he felt that he had done the
right thing in depositing the money with the clerk. The mere thought of
losing it, and finding himself high and dry--stranded, so to
speak--hundreds of miles from home, made him shudder. On the whole, Tom
had learned a valuable, though an unpleasant, lesson. The young are by
nature trustful. They are disposed to put confidence in those whom they
meet, even for the first time. Unhappily, in a world where there is so
much evil as there is in ours, such confidence is not justified. There
are too many who make it a business to prey on their fellows, and select
in preference the young and inexperienced.

It was only seven o'clock. Tom had a curiosity to see the city of
Pittsburg, with whose name he had been familiar. So, after parting with
his treasure, he went out for a walk. He did not much care where he
went, since all was alike new to him. He ascertained, on inquiry, that
Smithfield Street was the principal business thoroughfare. He inquired
his way thither, and walked slowly through it, his attention fully
occupied by what he saw.




CHAPTER VIII.

GRAHAM IN HIS TRUE COLORS.


Tom strayed into a street leading from the main thoroughfare. Presently
he came to a brilliantly-lighted liquor saloon. As he paused in front of
the door, a heavy hand was laid upon his shoulder, and, looking up, he
met the glance of a well-dressed gentleman, rather portly, whose
flushed face and uncertain gait indicated his condition. He leaned
rather heavily upon Tom, apparently for support, for he seemed to have
been drinking more than was good for him.

"My young friend," he said, "come in and take a drink."

"Thank you, sir, but I would rather not," said Tom, startled.

"It won't hurt you. It don't hurt me."

As he uttered these last words he came near falling. In his effort to
save himself he clutched Tom by the arm, and nearly pulled him over. Our
hero was anxious to get away.

"Are you sure it don't hurt you?" he could not help saying.

"Do you think I'm drunk?" demanded the other.

"I think you've taken more than is good for you, sir," Tom answered
bravely.

"I guess you're right," muttered the gentleman, trying to stand upright.
"The drink's gone to my legs. That's strange. Does it ever go to your
legs?"

"I never drink, sir."

"You're a most extraor'nary young man," hiccoughed Tom's new
acquaintance.

"I must bid you good-night, sir," said our hero, anxious to get away.

"Don't go. I can't get home alone."

"Where do you live, sir?"

"I live in the country."

"Are you staying at a hotel?"

"Yes--Pittsburg House. Know Pittsburg House?"

"Yes, sir. I am staying there myself. Shall I lead you there? You'd
better not drink any more."

"Jus' you say, my young frien'. You know best."

It was not a pleasant, or, indeed, an easy task to lead home the
inebriate, for he leaned heavily on Tom, and, being a large man, it was
as much as our hero could do to get him along. As they were walking
along Tom caught sight of his roommate, Milton Graham, just turning into
a saloon, in company with two other young men. They were laughing
loudly, and seemed in high spirits. Graham did not recognize Tom.

"I hope he won't come home drunk," thought our hero. "It seems to me it
is fashionable to drink here."

Tom's experience of city life was very limited. It was not long before
he learned that Pittsburg was by no means exceptional in this respect.

He ushered his companion safely into the hotel, and then a servant took
charge of him, and led him to his room. Tom sat up a little while
longer, reading a paper he found in the office, and then went to bed.

"I suppose Mr. Graham will come home late," he said to himself. "I must
leave the door unlocked."

He soon went to sleep. How long he slept he did not know, but suddenly
awoke after an interval. Opening his eyes he became conscious that
Graham had returned. He discovered something more. His roommate,
partially undressed, and with his back turned to Tom, was engaged in
searching our hero's pockets. This discovery set Tom broad awake at
once. He was not frightened, but rather amused when he thought of
Graham's disappointment. He did not think it best to speak, but
counterfeited sleep.

"I wonder where the boy keeps his money," he heard Graham mutter.
"Perhaps it is in his coat pocket. No, there is nothing but a
handkerchief. He's more careful than I gave him credit for. Perhaps it
is under his pillow."

He laid down the clothes, and approached the bed. Tom, with some effort,
kept his eyes firmly closed.

Graham slid his hand lightly under the pillow, but withdrew it with all
exclamation of disappointment.

"He must have some money," he muttered. "Ah, I have it! It is in his
valise."

He approached Tom's valise, but it was locked. He drew out a bunch of
keys, and tried one after the other, but in vain. Our hero feared he
might resort to violent means of opening it, and turned in bed. Graham
wheeled round quickly.

Tom stretched, and opened his eyes languidly.

"Is that you, Mr. Graham?" he asked.

"Yes," answered Graham nonchalantly, proceeding to undress himself.
"Have you been abed long?"

"I don't know," answered Tom. "What time is it?"

"Haven't you got a watch?"

"No, I am not rich enough."

"It is one o'clock. I hadn't seen my friend for a long time, and
couldn't get away till late. By the way, have you got a key about you? I
can't open my carpetbag."

Tom thought of suggesting the bunch of keys in Graham's pocket, but
decided not to.

"My key is in my pants' pocket."

"Suppose you get it," said Graham. "I don't like to feel in another
person's pocket. There might be some money there."

This was very scrupulous for one who had already searched all Tom's
pockets thoroughly.

Our hero got up, and got the key for his roommate.

"No, it won't fit," said the young man, after a brief trial. "It is too
large."

Tom replaced the key in his pocket, confident that Graham would in the
course of the night use it to open his valise. This, however, did not
trouble him.

"He won't think it worth while to steal my shirts or stockings," he
reflected, "and the handkerchiefs are not worth taking."

"It will be rather awkward if I can't find my keys," said Graham
craftily. "I keep my money in my valise."

He thought his unsophisticated companion would reveal in turn where he
kept his money; but Tom only said, "That is a good place," and, turning
over, closed his eyes again.

During the night Tom's valise was opened, as he ascertained in a simple
way. In the morning he found that the key was in the right hand-pocket
instead of the left, in which he had placed it.

Upon Graham's last failure he began to suspect what Tom had done with
his money.

"The boy isn't so green as I thought," he said to himself. "Curse his
prudence! I must get the money somehow, for I am precious hard up."

He got up early, when Tom was yet asleep, and went down to the office.

"Good morning," he said to the clerk affably.

"Good morning, sir."

"My young friend and roommate left his money with you last night. Please
deliver it to me."

"What is the number of your room?" asked the clerk quietly.

"No. 16. Tom Nelson is my roommate."

"Why doesn't he come for it himself?" inquired the hotel clerk, with a
searching glance at Graham.

"He wishes me to buy his steamboat ticket," answered Graham coolly. "He
is going down the river in my charge."

"Are you his guardian?"

"Yes," answered Graham, with cool effrontery. "He is the son of an
acquaintance of mine, and I naturally feel an interest in the boy."

"He told me he never met you till yesterday."

Graham was rather taken aback, but he recovered himself quickly.

"That's pretty cool in Tom," he returned, shrugging his shoulders. "I
understand it, though."

"I am glad you do," said the clerk sarcastically, "for it doesn't look
to me at all consistent with what you represent."

"The fact is," said Graham plausibly, "Tom has a feeling of
independence, and doesn't like to have it supposed that he is under
anybody's protection. That accounts for what he told you. It isn't
right, though, to misrepresent. I must give him a scolding. I am in a
little of a hurry, so if you will kindly give me the boy's money----"

"It won't do, Mr. Graham," said the clerk, very firmly. "The money was
put in our charge by the boy, and it will be delivered only to him."

"You seem to be very suspicious," said Graham loftily. "Hand me my bill,
if you please. I will breakfast elsewhere."

The bill was made out, and paid. Five minutes later Milton Graham, with
an air of outraged virtue, stalked out of the hotel, quite forgetting
the young friend who was under his charge.

When Tom came down-stairs he was told of the attempt to get possession
of his money.

"I am much obliged to you for not letting him have it," he said. "He
searched my clothes and valise during the night, but I said nothing, for
I knew he would find nothing worth taking."

"He is a dangerous companion. If you ever meet him again, I advise you
to give him a wide berth."

"I certainly shall follow your advice. If you had not warned me against
him he would have stolen my money during the night."




CHAPTER IX.

THE "RIVER BELLE."


As Tom took his place at the breakfast table, he mechanically lifted his
eyes and glanced at his neighbors. Directly opposite him sat the
gentleman whom he had brought home the evening before. Now he looked
sober and respectable. Indeed, he looked as if he might be a person of
some prominence. He met Tom's glance, and recognized him.

"I think you are the boy who came home with me last evening," he said.

"Yes, sir," answered Tom, rather embarrassed.

"I am afraid I was not quite myself," continued the stout gentleman.

"Not quite, sir."

"I ought to be ashamed of myself, and I am. I don't often allow myself
to be caught in that way. You did me a good service."

"You are quite welcome, sir."

"I had a good deal of money with me, and, if I had drank any more, I
should probably have been robbed."

"Why did you run such a risk, sir?" Tom could not help asking.

"Because I was a fool," said the other bluntly. "I have taste for drink,
but when I am at home I keep it under control."

"Then you don't live in Pittsburg, sir?"

"No. My home is in one of the river towns in Ohio. I came to Pittsburg
to collect money due me for produce, and but for you should probably
have carried none of it home."

"I am very glad to be of service to you," said our hero sincerely.

"What are your plans, my young friend? I suppose you are only a visitor
in this city."

"I am on my way to California. I expect to sail in the _River Belle_ at
nine o'clock."

"Then we shall be fellow passengers, and I shall have a chance to become
better acquainted with you. You are young to go to California alone. You
are alone--are you not?"

"Yes, sir."

They went down to the boat together, and on the way Tom told his story.
He learned that his acquaintance was Mr. Nicholas Waterbury; that he
had been a member of the Ohio Legislature, and, as he inferred, was a
prominent citizen of the town in which he lived.

"I should be very much ashamed to have them hear at home how I had
forgotten myself," said Mr. Waterbury.

"It need not be known," said Tom. "I shall not mention it to any one."

"Thank you," said Mr. Waterbury. "I would rather you did not, as the
news might reach my home."

"Where do you live, sir?"

"In Marietta. I shall be glad to have you leave the boat there, and stay
a day or two with me."

"Thank you, sir, but I am in a hurry to reach California, on my father's
account. I want to send back as soon as possible the money he raised to
pay my expenses out."

"That is very commendable; I can enter into your feelings. I should like
to show my obligation to you in some way."

"It is not worth thinking about, sir," said Tom modestly.

"Permit me to disagree with you. Why, my young friend, how much money do
you think I had with me?"

"I don't know, sir."

"Upward of six hundred dollars."

As Mr. Waterbury uttered these words, a young man, very dark, with
narrow black whiskers, passed them. He darted a quick glance at the
speaker, and walked rapidly on. Tom noticed him, but not with attention.

"That is a good deal of money, sir," he remarked.

"It would have been a good deal to lose," said Mr. Waterbury, "and I
have no doubt I should have lost it if it had not been for you."

"I haven't so much money as you, but I came near losing it last night."

"How was that?" asked Tom's new acquaintance, with curiosity.

Tom explained the attempt of his roommate to rob him.

"It would have been a serious loss to you, my young friend."

"It would have broken up all my plans, and I should have had to work my
way home, greatly disappointed."

"You will need to be careful about forming acquaintances. There are
exceptions, however. I am a new acquaintance; but I don't think you need
fear me."

"No, sir," said Tom, smiling.

"While I have received a great service from you, who are a new
acquaintance. But here we are at the steamer."

The _River Belle_ lay at her pier. Tom and his companion went on board.
Both secured tickets, and Tom provided himself with a stateroom, for he
expected to remain on board till they reached Cincinnati. Freight of
various kinds was being busily stowed away below. It was a busy and
animated scene, and Tom looked on with interest.

"Have you ever been on a steamboat before?" asked Mr. Waterbury.

"No, sir. I have never traveled any to speak of before leaving home on
this journey," replied Tom.

"It will be a pleasant variety for you, then, though the scenery is
tame. However, some of the river towns are pretty."

"I am sure I shall like it, sir."

"I wish I were going all the way with you--I mean as far as Cincinnati,"
said Mr. Waterbury.

"I wish you were, sir."

"I have a great mind to do it," said the gentleman musingly. "I should
have to go very soon on business, at any rate, and I can attend to it
now just as well as later."

"I shall be very glad if you can make it convenient, sir. We might
occupy the same stateroom."

"Are you not afraid that I shall follow the example of your Pittsburg
roommate?" asked Mr. Waterbury.

"I have less to lose than you," answered Tom. "Besides, I shall have to
have a roommate, as there are two berths."

"Precisely, and I might be safer than some. I have a great mind to keep
on. I shall see some one on the pier in Marietta by whom I can send word
to my family. By the way, I have a son about your age, and a daughter
two years younger."

"Have you, sir?" asked Tom, with interest.

"I should like you to meet them. Perhaps you may some day."

"I hope I may," said Tom politely.

"I am a manufacturer," continued Mr. Waterbury, "and sell my goods
chiefly in Pittsburg and Cincinnati. From these places they are
forwarded farther east and west."

"I suppose that's a pretty good business, sir?"

"Sometimes; but there are intervals of depression. However, I have no
right to complain. I began a poor boy, and now I am moderately rich."

"Were you as poor as I am?" inquired Tom, beginning to feel a personal
interest in his companion's career.

"Quite so, I fancy. At the age of sixteen I couldn't call myself the
owner of five dollars."

"And you have become rich?" said Tom, feeling very much encouraged.

"Moderately so. I am probably worth fifty thousand dollars, and am just
fifty years of age."

"That seems to me very rich," said Tom.

"I should have said the same thing at your age. Our views change as we
get older. Still, I regard myself as very well off, and, with prudent
management, I need not fear reverses."

"I should think not," said Tom.

"You don't know how easy it is to lose money, my boy. I am not
referring to robbery, but to mismanagement."

"Your success encourages me, Mr. Waterbury," said Tom. "I am willing to
work hard."

"I think you will succeed. You look like a boy of good habits. Energy,
industry, and good habits can accomplish wonders. But I think we are on
the point of starting."

Just before the gangplank was drawn in, two persons hastily crossed it.

One was the dark young man who had passed them on the way down to the
boat; the other was Milton Graham.

"Mr. Waterbury," said Tom hurriedly, "do you see that man?"

"Yes."

"He is the man that tried to rob me."

"We must be on our guard, then. He may be up to more mischief."




CHAPTER X.

ON THE STEAMER.


In half an hour the _River Belle_ was on her way. Tom watched the city
as it receded from view. He enjoyed this new mode of travel better than
riding on the cars. He had never before been on any boat except a
ferry-boat, and congratulated himself on his decision to journey by boat
part of the way.

Milton Graham had passed him two or three times, but Tom, though seeing
him, had not volunteered recognition. Finding that he must make the
first advances, Graham finally stopped short, looked full at our hero,
and his face wore a very natural expression of surprise and pleasure.

"Why, Tom, is that you?" he said, offering his hand, which Tom did not
appear to see.

"Yes," said our hero coldly.

"I didn't expect to see you here."

"I told you I intended to sail on the _River Belle_."

"So you did; but I thought you had changed your mind."

It made very little difference to Tom what Mr. Graham thought, and he
turned from him to watch the scenery past which the boat was gliding.

"I suppose," continued the young man, "you were surprised to find me
gone when you came down-stairs to breakfast."

"Yes, I was."

"He resents it because I left him," thought Graham. "I guess I can bring
him around."

"The fact was," explained Graham, in a plausible manner, "I went out to
call on a friend, meaning to come back to breakfast; but he made me
breakfast with him, and when I did return you were gone. I owe you an
apology, Tom. I hope you will excuse my unintentional neglect."

"Oh, certainly," said Tom indifferently; "it's of no consequence."

Mr. Graham looked at him sharply. He could not tell whether our hero
was aware of his dishonest intentions or not, but as Tom must still have
money, which he wanted to secure, he thought it best to ignore his
coldness.

"No," said he; "it's of no consequence as long as we have come together
again. By the way, have you secured a stateroom?"

"Yes."

"If the other berth is not taken, I should like very much to go in with
you," said Graham insinuatingly.

"I have a roommate," said Tom coolly.

"You have? Who is it?" demanded Graham, disappointed.

"That gentleman," answered Tom, pointing out Mr. Nicholas Waterbury.

"Humph! do you know him?"

"I met him at the Pittsburg House."

"My young friend," said Graham, with the air of a friendly mentor, "I
want to give you a piece of advice."

"Very well."

"Don't be too ready to trust strangers. This Mr. Waterbury may be a very
good man, but, on the other hand, he may be a confidence man. Do you
understand me?"

"I think so."

"Now, I suppose you have money?"

"A little."

"Take care that he doesn't get possession of it. There are men who go
about expressly to fleece inexperienced strangers."

"I suppose you know all about that," Tom could not help saying.

"What do you mean?" demanded Graham suspiciously.

"You are an old traveler, and must know all about the sharpers."

"Oh, to be sure," said Graham, immediately dismissing his suspicions.
"You couldn't leave your companion, could you, and come into my
stateroom?"

"I don't think I could."

"Oh, very well. It's of no consequence. Keep a good lookout for your
roommate."

Graham turned away, and resumed his walk. Soon Tom saw him in company
with the dark young man, to whom reference has already been made.

"Well," said the latter, "how did you make out with the boy?"

"He's offish. I don't know as he suspects me. I wanted to get him into
my stateroom, but he has already taken up with another man--that stout
party over there."

"So I suspected. I can tell you something about that man."

"What?"

"He carries six hundred dollars about him."

"You don't say so! How did you find out?"

"I overheard him telling the boy so."

"That's important news. The boy must have a couple of hundred, or
thereabouts, as he is on his way to California."

"Eight hundred dollars together! That would make a good haul."

"So it would, but it won't be easy to get it."

While this conversation was going on Tom informed Mr. Waterbury of what
had passed between Graham and himself.

"So he warned you against me, did he?" said Mr. Waterbury laughingly.

"Yes, he thought I would be safer in his company."

"If you want to exchange, I will retire," said Mr. Waterbury, smiling.

"Thank you; I would rather not. I am glad I met you, or he might have
managed to get in with me."

It was not long before they came to a landing. It was a small river
village, whose neat white houses, with here and there one of greater
pretensions, presented an attractive appearance. A lady and her daughter
came on board here. The lady was dressed in black, and appeared to be a
widow. The girl was perhaps fourteen years of age, with a bright,
attractive face. Two trunks were put on the boat with them, and as they
were the only passengers from this landing, Tom inferred that they were
their property.

"That's quite a pretty girl," said Mr. Waterbury.

"Yes," answered Tom.

"You ought to get acquainted with her," said Mr. Waterbury jocosely.

"Perhaps," said Tom shyly, "you will get acquainted with them, and then
you can introduce me."

"You are quite sharp," said Mr. Waterbury, laughing. "However, your
hint is a good one. I may act upon it."

It happened, however, that Tom required no introduction. As the lady and
her daughter walked across the deck, to occupy some desirable seats on
the other side, the former dropped a kid glove, which Tom, espying,
hastened forward and, picking up, politely tendered to the owner.

"You are very kind," said the lady, in a pleasant voice. "I am much
obliged."

"Mama is quite in the habit of dropping her gloves," said the young
girl, with a smiling glance at Tom. "I really think she does it on
purpose."

"Then, perhaps, I had better keep near-by to pick them up," said Tom.

"Really, Jennie," said her mother, "you are giving the young gentleman a
strange impression of me."

"Well, mama, you know you dropped your gloves in the street the last
time you were in Pittsburg, but there was no gentleman to pick them up,
so I had to. Are you going to Cincinnati?" she asked, turning to Tom.

"Yes, and farther; I am going to California," replied Tom.

"Dear me, you will be quite a traveler. I wish I were going to
California."

"You wouldn't like to go there on the same business that I am."

"What is that?"

"I am going to dig gold."

"I don't know. I suppose it isn't girl's work; but if I saw any gold
about, I should like to dig for it. Is that your father that was
standing by you?"

"No," answered Tom. "I never met him till yesterday. We were staying at
the same hotel in Pittsburg."

"He seems like quite a nice old gentleman."

Mr. Waterbury was not over fifty, but to the young girl he seemed an old
gentleman.

"I find him very pleasant."

There was a seat next to Jennie, and Tom ventured to occupy it.

"What is your name?" asked the young lady sociably.

"Thomas Nelson, but most people call me Tom."

"My name is Jane Watson, but everybody calls me Jennie."

"That is much prettier than Jane."

"So I think. Jane seems old-maidish, don't you think so?"

"Are you afraid of becoming an old maid?" asked Tom, smiling.

"Awfully. I wouldn't be an old maid for anything. My school-teacher is
an old maid. She's horribly prim. She won't let us laugh, or talk, or
anything."

"I don't think you'll grow up like that."

"I hope not."

"How you run on, Jennie!" said her mother. "What will this young
gentleman think of you?"

"Nothing very bad, I hope," said Jennie, smiling archly on Tom. "I
suppose," she continued, addressing him, "I ought to be very quiet and
reserved, as you are a stranger."

"I hope you won't be," said Tom heartily.

"Then I won't. Somehow you don't seem like a stranger. You look a good
deal like a cousin of mine. I suppose that is the reason."

So they chatted on for an hour or more. Jennie was very vivacious,
occasionally droll, and Tom enjoyed her company. The mother saw that our
hero was well-behaved and gentlemanly, and made no objection to the
sudden intimacy.




CHAPTER XI.

THE FIRST DAY ON THE RIVER.


About half-past twelve dinner was announced.

"I hope you'll sit next to us, Tom," said Jennie Watson.

"I will, if I can."

It happened that Milton Graham entered the saloon at the same time with
the new friends. He took the seat next to Jennie, much to that young
lady's annoyance.

"Will you be kind enough to take the next seat?" she asked. "That young
gentleman is to sit next to me."

"I am sorry to resign the pleasure, but anything to oblige," said
Graham. "Tom, I congratulate you," he continued, with a disagreeable
smile.

"Thank you," said our hero briefly.

"He calls you Tom. Does he know you?" inquired Jennie, in a low voice.

"I made his acquaintance yesterday for the first time."

"I don't like his looks; do you?"

"Wait till after dinner and I will tell you," said Tom, fearing that
Graham would hear.

Milton Graham saw that Jennie was pretty, and desired to make her
acquaintance.

"Tom," said he--for he sat on the other side of our hero--"won't you
introduce me to your young lady friend?"

Tom was not well versed in etiquette, but his good sense told him that
he ought to ask Jennie's permission first.

"If Miss Watson is willing," he said, and asked her the question.

Jennie was not aware of Graham's real character, and gave permission.
She was perhaps a little too ready to make new acquaintances.

"Do you enjoy this mode of travel, Miss Watson?" said Graham, after the
introduction.

"Oh, yes; I think it very pleasant."

"I suppose you wouldn't like the ocean as well. I went to Havana last
winter--on business for my father--and had a very rough passage. The
steamer pitched and tossed, making us all miserably seasick."

"I shouldn't like that."

"I don't think you would; but we business men must not regard such
things."

Tom listened to him with incredulity. Only the day before he would have
put full confidence in his statement; but he had learned a lesson,
thanks to Graham himself.

"How far are you going, Miss Watson?" continued Graham.

"To Cincinnati. My mother and I are going to live there."

"It is a very pleasant city. I have often been there--on business."

"What is your business, Mr. Graham?" Tom could not help asking.

"I see you are a Yankee," said Graham, smiling. "Yankees are very
inquisitive--always asking questions."

"Are you a Yankee, Mr. Graham?" asked Jennie. "You asked me where I was
going."

"A fair hit," said Graham. "No, I am not a Yankee. I am a native of New
York."

"And I of New Jersey," said Tom.

"Oh, you are a foreigner then," said Graham. "We always call Jerseymen
foreigners."

"It is a stupid joke, I think," said Tom, who was loyal to his native
State.

"You didn't answer Tom's question," said Jennie, who was a very
straightforward young lady.

"Oh, my father is a commission merchant," answered Graham.

"What does he deal in?"

"Articles too numerous to mention. Tom, will you pass me the potatoes?"

Dinner was soon over, and the passengers went upon deck. Graham lit a
cigar.

"Have a cigar, Tom?" he said.

"No, thank you; I don't smoke."

"You'll soon learn. I'll see you again soon."

"Tom," said Jennie, "tell me about this Mr. Graham. What do you know
about him?"

"I don't like to tell what I know," said Tom, hesitating.

"But I want you to. You introduced me, you know."

"What I know is not to his advantage. I don't like to talk against a
man."

"You needn't mind telling me."

On reflection Tom decided that he ought to tell what he knew, for he
felt that Jennie ought to be put on her guard against a man whom he did
not consider a suitable acquaintance for her.

"Very well," said he, "if you promise not to let him know that I have
told you."

"I promise."

"He was my roommate last night at the Pittsburg House," said Tom, in a
low voice. "During the night he tried to rob me."

"You don't say so!" ejaculated Jennie, in round-eyed wonder.

"I will tell you the particulars."

This Tom did. Jennie listened with indignation.

"But I don't understand," she said. "Why should the son of a merchant
need to rob a boy like you? He looks as if he had plenty of money."

"So I thought; but the hotel clerk told me that sharpers often appeared
like this Mr. Graham, if that is his name."

"How strange it seems!" said Jennie. "I wish you hadn't introduced me."

"I didn't want to; but he asked, and at the table I couldn't give my
reasons for refusing."

"My dear child," said her mother, "you are too ready to form new
acquaintances. Let this be a lesson for you."

"But some new acquaintances are nice," pleaded Jennie. "Isn't Tom a new
acquaintance?"

"I will make an exception in his favor," said Mrs. Watson, smiling
pleasantly.

"Thank you," said Tom. "How do you know but I may be a pickpocket?" he
continued, addressing Jennie.

"As I have only ten cents in my pocket I will trust you," said the young
lady merrily. "I'd trust you with any amount, Tom," she added
impulsively.

"Thank you, for your good opinion, Miss Jennie."

"Don't call me Miss Jennie. If you do, I'll call you Mr. Tom."

"I shouldn't know myself by that title. Then I'll call you Jennie."

"I wish you were going to live in Cincinnati," said the young lady. "It
would be nice to have you come and see us."

"I should like it; but I mustn't think so much of pleasure as business."

"Like Mr. Graham."

"I must work hard at the mines. I suppose I shall look pretty rough when
I am there."

"When you've made your pile, Tom--that's what they call it, isn't
it?--you'll come back, won't you?"

"Yes."

"You must stop in Cincinnati on your way home."

"I wouldn't know where to find you."

"I will give you our address before we part. But that will be some time
yet."

About this time Graham, who had finished smoking his cigar, strolled
back.

"Miss Watson," said he, "don't you feel like having a promenade?"

"Yes," said Jennie suddenly. "Tom, come walk with me."

Our hero readily accepted the invitation, and the two walked up and down
the deck.

"That's what I call a snub," said Graham's friend, the dark-complexioned
young man, who was within hearing.

Graham's face was dark with anger.

"Curse her impudence, and his too!" he muttered. "I should like to wring
the boy's neck."

"He can't help it, if the girl prefers his company," said the other,
rather enjoying Graham's mortification.

"I'll punish him all the same."

By this time Tom and Jennie were near him again, on their return.

"You don't treat me with much ceremony, Miss Watson," said Graham, with
an evil smile.

"My mother doesn't like me to make too many acquaintances," said Jennie
demurely.

"She is very prudent," sneered Graham. "You have known your present
companion quite a long time."

"I hope to know him a long time," said the young lady promptly. "Let's
us continue our walk, Tom."

In discomfiture which he was unable to hide, Graham walked away.

"Evidently, Graham, you are no match for those two youngsters," said his
friend, in amusement, which Graham did not share.

Graham did not reply, but seemed moody and preoccupied.

Tom and his companion noticed Graham's displeasure, but they felt
indifferent to it. They had no desire to continue his acquaintance. Our
hero introduced Mr. Waterbury to his new friends, and this gentleman,
who was a thorough gentleman, except on the rare occasion when he
yielded to the temptation of strong drink, made a favorable impression
upon both.

So the day passed. Tom enjoyed it thoroughly. The river banks afforded a
continuous panorama, while the frequent stops gave him an opportunity of
observing the different towns in detail. Two or three times he went
ashore, accompanied by Jennie, and remained till the steamer was ready
to start.

Finally night came, and one by one the weary passengers retired to rest.

"Good night, Tom," said Jennie Watson. "Be up early in the morning."

"So as to get an appetite for breakfast?" asked Tom, with a smile.

"I think we shall both have appetites enough; but it will be pleasant to
breathe the fresh morning air."

Tom promised to get up, if he wakened in time.

"If you don't mind, I will occupy the lower berth," said Mr. Waterbury.
"I can't climb as well as you."

"All right, sir. It makes no difference to me."




CHAPTER XII.

NO. 61 AND NO. 62.


The stateroom was small, as most staterooms on river boats are. There
appeared to be no means of ventilation. Mr. Waterbury was a stout man,
and inclined to be short-breathed. After an hour he rose and opened the
door, so as to leave it slightly ajar. With the relief thus afforded he
was able to go to sleep, and sleep soundly. Tom was already asleep, and
knew nothing of what had happened.

The number of the stateroom was 61. Directly opposite was 62, occupied
by Milton Graham and his companion.

If Graham did not go to sleep it was because his brain was busily
scheming how to obtain possession of the money belonging to his
neighbors.

"Won't your key fit?" asked Vincent, for this was the name of the
dark-complexioned young man.

"No use, even if it does. Of course they will lock it inside, and
probably leave the key in the lock."

About midnight, Graham, who had not fully undressed, having merely taken
off his coat, got up, and, opening the door, peered out. To his surprise
and joy he saw that the door of No. 61 was ajar. He at first thought of
rousing Vincent, who was asleep; but a selfish thought suggested
itself. If he did this, he must share with Vincent anything he might
succeed in stealing; if not, he could keep it all himself.

He left his stateroom silently, and looked cautiously around him. No one
seemed to be stirring in the cabin. Next he stepped across, and, opening
wider the door of 61, looked in. The two inmates were, to all
appearances, sleeping soundly.

"So far, so good," he said to himself.

He stepped in, moderating even his breathing, and took up a pair of
pants which lay on a chair. They belonged to Mr. Waterbury, for Tom had
merely taken off his coat, and lain down as he was. His belt of gold he
therefore found it unnecessary to take off.

Graham saw at once, from the size of the pants, that they must belong to
the elder passenger. This suited him, however, as he knew from Vincent's
information that Mr. Waterbury had six hundred dollars, and Tom could
not be supposed to have anything like this sum. He felt eagerly in the
pockets, and to his great joy his hand came in contact with a pocketbook.
He drew it out without ceremony. It was a comfortable-looking wallet,
fairly bulging with bills.

"He's got all his money inside," thought Graham, delighted. "What a fool
he must be to leave it so exposed--with his door open, too!"

At this moment Graham heard a stir in the lower berth. There was no time
to wait. He glided out of the room, and reentered his own stateroom.
Immediately after his departure Mr. Waterbury, who had awakened in time
to catch sight of his receding figure, rose in his berth, and drew
toward him the garment which Graham had rifled. He felt in the pocket,
and discovered that the wallet had been taken.

Instead of making a fuss, he smiled quietly, and said: "Just as I
expected."

"I wonder if they have robbed Tom, too," he said to himself.

He rose, closed the door, and then shook Tom with sufficient energy to
awaken him.

"Who's there?" asked Tom, in some bewilderment, as he opened his eyes.

"It's I--Mr. Waterbury."

"Is it morning? Have we arrived?"

"No, it is about midnight."

"Is there anything the matter?"

"I want you to see if you have been robbed.'"

Tom was broad awake in an instant.

"Robbed!" he exclaimed, in alarm. He felt for his belt and was relieved.

"No," he answered. "What makes you ask?"

"Because I have had a wallet taken. It makes me laugh when I think of
it."

"Makes you laugh!" repeated Tom, under the transient impression that his
companion was insane. "Why should you laugh at the loss of your money?"

"I saw the thief sneak out of the stateroom," continued Mr. Waterbury;
"but I didn't interfere with him."

"You didn't!" said Tom, completely mystified. "I would. Did you see who
it was?"

"Yes; it was your friend and late roommate."

"Mr. Graham?"

"As he calls himself. I don't suppose he has any rightful claim to the
name."

"Surely, Mr. Waterbury, you are not going to let him keep the money,"
said Tom energetically; "I'll go with you, and make him give it up.
Where is his stateroom?"

"Just opposite--No. 62."

"We had better go at once," said Tom, sitting up in his berth.

"Oh, no; he's welcome to all there is in the pocketbook."

"Wasn't there anything in it?"

"It was stuffed full."

Tom was more than ever convinced that his roommate was crazy. He had
heard that misfortune sometimes affected a man's mind; and he was
inclined to think that here was a case in point.

"You'll get it back," said he soothingly. "Graham can't get off the
boat. We will report the matter to the captain."

"I don't care whether I get it back or not," said Mr. Waterbury.

Tom looked so confused and bewildered that his companion felt called
upon to end the mystification.

"I know what is in your mind," he said, smiling. "You think I am crazy."

"I don't understand how you can take your loss so coolly, sir."

"Then I will explain. That wallet was a dummy."

"A what, sir?"

"A sham--a pretense. My pocketbook and money are safe under my pillow.
The wallet taken by your friend was filled with imitation greenbacks; in
reality, business circulars of a firm in Marietta."

Tom saw it all now.

"It's a capital joke," he said, laughing. "I'd like to see how Graham
looks when he discovers the value of his prize."

"He will look green, and feel greener, I suspect," chuckled Mr.
Waterbury. "You are certain you have lost nothing, Tom?"

"Perfectly certain, sir."

"Then we won't trouble ourselves about what has happened. I fancy,
however, it will be best to keep our own door locked for the remainder
of the night, even at the risk of suffocation."

"That's a capital trick of yours, Mr. Waterbury," said Tom admiringly.

"It has more than once saved me from robbery. I have occasion to travel
considerably, and so am more or less exposed."

"I wonder if Graham will discover the cheat before morning."

"I doubt it. The staterooms are dark, and the imitation is so good that
on casual inspection the strips of paper will appear to be genuine
greenbacks."

Mr. Waterbury retired to his berth, and was soon asleep again. Tom, as
he lay awake, from time to time laughed to himself, as he thought of
Graham's coming disappointment, and congratulated himself that he and
that young man were no longer roommates.

When Graham returned to his stateroom Vincent, who was a light sleeper,
was aroused by the slight noise he made.

"Are you up, Graham?" he asked.

"Yes; I got up a minute."

"Have you been out of the stateroom?"

"Yes."

"What for?"

"To get a glass of water."

There was a vessel of water in the cabin, and this seemed plausible
enough.

"Any chance of doing anything to-night?"

"No, I think not."

Vincent sank back on his pillow, and Graham got back into his berth.
Quietly he drew the wallet from his pocket, in which he had placed it,
and eagerly opened it. The huge roll of bills was a pleasant and welcome
sight.

"There's all of six hundred dollars here!" he said to himself. "I
mustn't let Vincent know that I have them."

It occurred to Graham that, of course, Mr. Waterbury would proclaim his
loss in the morning, and it also occurred to him that he might be able
to fasten suspicion upon Tom, who, as his roommate, would naturally have
the best chance to commit the robbery. One thing might criminate
him--the discovery of the wallet upon his person. He therefore waited
till Vincent was once more asleep, and, getting up softly, made his way
to the deck. He drew the bills from the wallet, put them in an inside
pocket, and threw the wallet into the river.

"Now I'm safe," he muttered, with a sigh of relief. "The money may be
found on me, but no one can prove it is not my own."

He gained his berth without again awakening his companion.

"A pretty good night's work!" he said to himself, in quiet exultation.
"Alone I have succeeded, while Vincent lies in stupid sleep. He is no
match for me, much as he thinks of himself. I have stolen a march upon
him this time."

It is not in accordance with our ideas of the fitness of things that a
man who has committed a midnight robbery should be able to sleep
tranquilly for the balance of the night, but it is at any rate certain
that Graham slept soundly till his roommate awakened him in the morning.

"Rouse up, Graham," he said. "Breakfast is nearly ready."

"Is it?" asked Graham.

"Instead of sleeping there, you ought to be thinking how we can make a
forced loan from our acquaintances in 61."

"To be sure," said Graham, smiling. "I am rather stupid about such
things. Have you any plan to suggest?"

"You seem very indifferent all at once," said Vincent.

"Not at all. If you think of anything practical I am your man."

He longed to get rid of Vincent, in order to have an opportunity of
counting his roll of bills.




CHAPTER XIII.

GRAHAM'S DISAPPOINTMENT.


Milton Graham, on reaching a place where he could do so unobserved, drew
from his pocket the roll of bills, with a smile of exultation. But the
smile faded, and was succeeded by a look of dismay, when he recognized
the worthlessness of his booty. An oath rose to his lips, and he thrust
the roll back into his pocket, as he noticed the approach of a
passenger.

"It's a cursed imposition!" he muttered to himself, and he really felt
that he had been wronged by Mr. Waterbury.

"What are you doing out here, Graham?" asked Vincent, for it was his
confederate who approached.

"Nothing in particular. Why?" responded Graham.

"What makes you look so glum?"

"Do I look glum?"

"You look as if you had but one friend in the world, and were about to
lose him."

"That may be true enough," muttered Graham.

"Come, man, don't look so downcast."

"I'm out of luck, and out of cash, Vincent."

"We're both in the same boat, as far as that goes; but that isn't going
to last. How about our stout friend? Can't we make him contribute to our
necessities?"

"I don't believe he's got any money."

"No? Why, I heard him tell the boy he had six hundred dollars."

"Where does he keep it?"

"In his pocketbook probably."

"Will you oblige me by stating how we are going to get hold of it?"

"I look to you for that."

"He's too careful. I leave you to try your hand."

"Let me go in to breakfast. There's nothing like a full stomach to
suggest ideas."

So the two went to the breakfast table, and Graham, in spite of his
disappointment, managed to eat a hearty meal.

An hour later Mr. Waterbury and Tom were standing on deck, conversing
with Jennie Watson and her mother, when Graham and Vincent approached
arm in arm. As soon as they were within hearing distance Mr. Waterbury
purposely remarked, "By the way, Mrs. Watson, I met with a loss last
night."

"Indeed!" returned the lady.

Graham was about to push on, not wishing Vincent to hear the disclosure,
as it might awaken his suspicions; but the latter's curiosity was
aroused.

"Wait, Graham," he said; and Graham, against his will, was compelled to
slacken his pace.

"A man entered my stateroom during the night, and stole a wallet from my
coat pocket."

Graham changed color a little, and Vincent seemed amazed.

"Did you hear that, Graham?" he asked.

"Yes."

"What does it mean?"

"How can I tell?"

"I hope you did not lose much," said Mrs. Watson, in a tone of sympathy.

"I lost the wallet," said Mr. Waterbury, laughing.

"Was there nothing in it?"

"It was full of bills."

Vincent looked at Graham with new-born suspicion, but Graham looked
indifferent.

"It appears to me that you take the loss cheerfully," said Mrs. Watson,
puzzled.

"I have reason to. The fact is, I was prepared for the visit, and had
filled the wallet with bogus bills. I fancy they won't do my visitor
much good."

The lady smiled.

"You were fortunate, Mr. Waterbury," said she. "Do you suspect any one
of the theft?"

"I know pretty well who robbed me," returned Mr. Waterbury, and he
suffered his glance to rest on Graham, who seemed in a hurry to get
away.

"Come along, Vincent," he said sharply.

Vincent obeyed. Light dawned upon him, and he determined to verify his
suspicions.

"Graham," said he, in a low voice, "you did this."

"Did what?"

"You got that wallet."

Graham concluded that he might as well make a clean breast of it, since
it had become a matter of necessity.

"Well," said he, "suppose I did?"

"You were not going to let me know of it," said Vincent suspiciously.

"That is true. I was ashamed of having been imposed upon."

"When did you find out that the money was bogus?"

"Immediately."

"If it had been good, would you have shared with me honorably?"

"Of course. What do you take me for?"

Vincent was silent. He did not believe his companion. He suspected that
the latter had intended to steal a march on him.

"You might have told me of it," he continued, in a tone of
dissatisfaction.

"There was no need to say anything, as there was nothing to divide."

"Have you got the wallet with you now?"

"No; I threw it overboard."

"And the bills?"

"You may have them all, if you like."

"Come into the stateroom, where we can be unobserved, and show them to
me."

Graham complied with his suggestion.

"It would have been a good haul if they had been genuine," said Vincent,
as he unfolded the roll.

"Yes, but they are not; worse luck!"

"I didn't give the old fellow credit for being so sharp."

"Nor I. There's more in him than I supposed there was."

"Well, what is to be done?"

"Nothing. The old man is on his guard, and, besides, he suspects me. He
was probably awake when I entered the stateroom. He and the boy have
probably laughed over it together. I hate that boy."

"Why?"

"Because he is a green country boy, and yet he has succeeded in
thwarting me. I am ashamed whenever I think of it."

"Would you like to play a trick on him in turn?"

"Yes."

"Then give me this roll of bills."

"What do you want to do with them?"

"Put them in his pocket."

"Can you do it unobserved?"

"Yes. The fact is, Graham, I served an apprenticeship as a pickpocket,
and flatter myself I still have some dexterity in that line."

"Very well, it will be some satisfaction, and if the old man didn't see
me enter the stateroom, he may be brought to believe that the boy robbed
him. If that could be, I should feel partly compensated for my
disappointment. I should like to get that boy into trouble."

"Consider it done, so far as I am concerned. Now let us separate, so as
to avoid suspicion."

Vincent began to pace the deck in a leisurely manner, in each case
passing near Tom, who was still engaged in conversation with Jennie
Watson and her mother. For a time he was unable to effect his purpose,
as our hero was sitting down. But after a while Tom rose, and stood with
his back to Vincent. He wore a sack coat, with side pockets. This was
favorable to Vincent, who, as he passed, adroitly slipped the bills into
one of them, without attracting the attention of our hero.

Presently Tom thrust his hand into his pocket mechanically. They
encountered the bills. In surprise he drew them out, and looked at them
in amazement.

"What's that, Tom?" asked Jennie, with great curiosity.

"It looks like money," answered Tom, not yet understanding what had
happened.

"You seem to be rich."

"By gracious!--it's Mr. Waterbury's money," exclaimed Tom. Then he
colored, as it flashed upon him that its presence in his pocket might
arouse suspicion. "I don't see how it got there," he continued, in a
bewildered way.

Just then Mr. Waterbury came up, and was made acquainted with the
discovery.

"I don't know what you'll think, Mr. Waterbury," said Tom, coloring; "I
haven't the slightest idea how the money came in my pocket."

"I have," said Mr. Waterbury quietly.

Tom looked at him, to discover whether he was under suspicion.

"The companion of your friend Graham slipped it into your pocket. He was
very quick and adroit, but I detected him. He wanted to throw suspicion
upon you."

"It is lucky you saw him, sir."

"Why?"

"You might have suspected me."

"My dear boy, don't trouble yourself about that. No circumstantial
evidence will shake my confidence in your integrity."

"Thank you, sir," said Tom gratefully.

"What a wicked man to play a trick on you, Tom!" exclaimed Jennie
indignantly.

"I see there is somebody else who has confidence in you, Tom," said Mr.
Waterbury, smiling; "I'd like to give him a piece of my mind."

"I am ready to forgive him," said Mr. Waterbury, "as he has restored the
money. It will do as a bait for the next thief."




CHAPTER XIV.

COMING TO AN UNDERSTANDING.


"I believe, Tom," said Mr. Waterbury, "that I will come to an
understanding with these officious acquaintances of yours. I will
intimate to them that their persecution must cease."

"Will they mind what you say, sir?"

"I think they will," answered his friend quietly.

Graham and Vincent were standing together, and apart from the rest of
the passengers, when Mr. Waterbury approached them.

"A word with you, gentlemen," said he gravely.

"I don't know you, sir," blustered Vincent.

"Perhaps not. Permit me to remark that I have no special desire for your
acquaintance."

"Then why do you take the liberty of addressing me?"

"I rather admire the fellow's impudence," said Mr. Waterbury to himself.

"Are you associated with this gentleman?" he asked, indicating Graham.

"We are friends."

"Then I will address an inquiry to him. I am not in the habit of
receiving calls in my stateroom during the hours of sleep."

"I don't understand you, sir," said Milton Graham, with hauteur.

"Oh, yes, you do, unless your memory is singularly defective. Our
staterooms are close together. You entered mine last night."

"You must have been dreaming."

"If so, I was dreaming with my eyes open. Perhaps it was in my dreams
that I saw you extract a wallet from my coat pocket."

"Do you mean to insult me, sir?" demanded Graham.

"Really, sir, your remarks are rather extraordinary," chimed in Vincent.

"Do you mean to say that I robbed you?" demanded Graham, confident in
the knowledge that the booty was not on his person.

"I find a wallet missing. That speaks for itself."

"Let me suggest that your roommate probably took it," said Vincent.

"Extremely probable," said Graham. "He roomed with me in Pittsburg, and
I caught him at my pockets during the night."

"Did you ever hear the fable of the wolf and the lamb, Mr. Graham?"
asked Mr. Waterbury.

"Can't say I have."

"It's of no consequence. I am reminded of it, however."

"Come to think of it," said Vincent, "I saw the boy with a roll of
bills. You had better search him. If he is innocent, he can't object."

"I see your drift," returned Mr. Waterbury, after a pause. "I saw you
thrust the bills into his pocket, as he stood with his back turned,
conversing with one of the passengers. It was very skilfully done, but I
saw it."

Vincent started, for he had supposed himself unobserved.

"I see you are determined to insult us," he said. "I will charitably
conclude that you are drunk."

"I can't be so charitable with you, sir. I believe you are a pair of
precious scoundrels, who, if you had your deserts, would be in the
penitentiary instead of at large."

"I have a mind to knock you down," said Vincent angrily.

As Vincent was several inches shorter and much slighter than the person
whom he threatened, this menace sounded rather ridiculous.

"You are at liberty to try it," said the latter, smiling. "First,
however, let me warn you that, if you continue to annoy us, it will be
at your peril. If you remain quiet I shall leave you alone. Otherwise I
will make known your true character to the captain and passengers, and
you will undoubtedly be set ashore when we reach the next landing. I
have the honor to wish you good morning."

"It strikes me, Graham," said Vincent, as Mr. Waterbury left them, "that
we have tackled the wrong passenger."

"I believe you are right," said Graham. "Just my luck."

"There isn't much use in staying on the boat. He will keep a good
lookout for us."

"True; but I don't want to give up the boy."

"He is under the guardianship of this determined old party."

"They will separate at Cincinnati."

"Well?"

"He has money enough to take him to California. He is worth following
up."

"Then you are in favor of going on to Cincinnati?"

"By all means."

"Very well. There are always chances of making an honest penny in a
large city."

"Money or no money, I want to get even with the boy."

So the worthy pair decided to go on to Cincinnati.




CHAPTER XV.

THE ALLEGHANY HOUSE.


It was a bright, sunny morning when the _River Belle_ touched her pier
at Cincinnati. The passengers gathered on deck, and discussed their
plans. In one group were Tom, Mr. Waterbury, Jennie Watson, and her
mother.

"I am sorry you are going to leave us, Tom," said Jennie; "I shall feel
awfully lonely."

"So shall I," said Tom.

"What's the use of going to that hateful California? Why can't you stay
here with us?"

"Business before pleasure, Jennie," said her mother. "You mustn't forget
that Tom has his fortune to make."

"I wish he could make it in Cincinnati, mother."

"So do I; but I must admit that California presents a better prospect
just at present. You are both young, and I hope we may meet Tom in after
years."

"When I have made my pile," suggested Tom.

"Precisely."

"You won't go right on, Tom, will you?" asked Jennie. "You'll stay here
a day or two."

"Yes; I should like to see something of Cincinnati."

"And you'll call on us?"

"I shall be very happy to do so. Where are you going to stay?"

"At the Burnet House. Won't you come there, too?"

"Is it a high-priced hotel?"

"I believe it is."

"Then I can't afford to stay there; but I can call on you all the same."

"Stay there as my guest, Tom," said Mr. Waterbury cordially. "It shall
not cost you anything."

"Thank you, sir. You are very kind, but I don't like to accept
unnecessary favors. I will put up at some cheap hotel, and call upon you
both."

"You would be heartily welcome, my boy," said Mr. Waterbury.

"I don't doubt it, sir, and the time may come when I will gladly accept
your kindness," replied Tom.

"But now you mean to have your own way; is that it, Tom."

"You won't be offended, sir?"

"On the contrary, I respect you for your manly independence. You won't
forget that I am your friend?"

"I don't want to forget that, sir."

So it happened that while Mrs. Watson, Jennie, and Mr. Waterbury
registered at the Burnet House, Tom, carpetbag in hand, walked through
the streets till he came to a plain inn, bearing the name Alleghany
House. It is not now in existence, having given way to an imposing
business block.

"That looks as if it might suit my purse," thought Tom.

He walked in, and, approaching the desk, inquired: "How much do you
charge at this hotel?"

"A dollar a day," answered the clerk. "Will you have a room?"

"Yes, sir."

"Please register your name." Tom did so.

"Cato," called the clerk--summoning a colored boy, about Tom's
size--"take this young man to No. 18."

"All right, sar," said Cato, showing his ivories.

"When do you have dinner?" asked Tom.

"One o'clock."

Preceded by Cato, Tom walked up-stairs, and was ushered into a small,
dingy room on the second floor. There was a single window, looking
through dingy panes upon a back yard. There was a general air of
cheerlessness and discomfort, but at any rate it was larger than the
stateroom on the _River Belle_.

"Is this the best room you have?" asked Tom, not very favorably
impressed.

"Oh, no, sar," answered Cato. "If your wife was with you, sar, we'd give
you a scrumptious room, 'bout twice as big."

"I didn't bring my wife along, Cato," said Tom, amused. "Are you
married?"

"Not yet, sar," answered his colored guide, with a grin.

"I think we can wait till we are a little older."

"Reckon so, sar."

"Just bring up a little water, Cato. I feel in need of washing."

"Dirt don't show on me," said Cato, with a guffaw.

"I suppose you do wash, now and then, don't you?"

"Yes, sar, sometimes," answered Cato equivocally.

When Tom had completed his toilet he found that it was but ten o'clock.
He accordingly went down-stairs, intending to see a little of the city
before dinner.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE EVENTS OF A MORNING.


Graham and Vincent had kept quiet during the latter part of the voyage.
They had a wholesome fear of Mr. Waterbury, and kept aloof from him and
Tom. They even exchanged their stateroom for one at a different part of
the boat. All was satisfactory to Tom and his companion.

When the worthy pair reached Cincinnati they were hard up. Their united
funds amounted to but seven dollars, and it seemed quite necessary that
they should find the means of replenishing their purses somewhere. They
managed to ascertain that Tom and his friend were going to separate, and
this afforded them satisfaction, since it made their designs upon our
hero more feasible. At a distance they followed Tom to the Alleghany
House, and themselves took lodgings at a small, cheap tavern near-by.
Like Tom, they set out soon after their arrival in quest of adventure.

"We must strike a vein soon, Graham," said Vincent, "or we shall be in a
tight place."

"That's so," answered Graham.

"Thus far our trip hasn't paid very well. It's been all outgo and no
income."

"You're right, partner; but don't give up the ship," responded Graham,
whose spirits returned, now that he was on dry land. "I've been in the
same straits about once a month for the last five years."

"I've known you for three years, Graham, and, so far as my knowledge
extends, I can attest the truth of what you say. By the way, you never
say anything of your life before that date."

A shadow passed over Graham's face.

"Because I don't care to think of it; I never talk of it," he said.

"Pshaw, man, we all of us have some ugly secrets. Suppose we confide in
each other. Tell me your story, and I will tell you mine. It won't
change my opinion of you."

"Probably not," said Graham. "Well, there is no use in holding back. For
this once I will go back to the past. Five years ago I was a favorite in
society. One day an acquaintance introduced me into a gambling house,
and I tried my hand successfully. I went out with fifty dollars more
than I brought in. It was an unlucky success, for it made me a frequent
visitor. All my surplus cash found a market there, and when that was
exhausted I borrowed from my employer."

"Without his knowledge?"

"Of course. For six months I evaded discovery. Then I was detected. My
friends interceded, and saved me from the penitentiary, but I lost my
situation, and was required to leave the city. I went to New York, tried
to obtain a situation there, failed, and then adopted my present
profession. I need not tell you the rest."

"My dear friend, I think I know the rest pretty well. But don't look
sober. A fig for the past. What's the odds, as long as you're happy?"

"Are you happy?" inquired Graham.

"As long as I'm flush," answered Vincent, shrugging his shoulders. "I'm
nearly dead-broke now, and of course I am miserable. However, my story
comes next in order. I was a bank teller, appropriated part of the funds
of the bank, fled with it, spent it, and then became an ornament to our
common profession."

"Where was the bank?"

"In Canada. I haven't been there since. The climate don't suit me. It's
bleak, but I fear it might prove too hot for me. Now we know each
other."

"You don't allow it to worry you, Vincent," said Graham.

"No, I don't. Why should I? I let the dead past bury its dead, as
Longfellow says, and act in the living present. That reminds me, we
ought to be at work. I have a proposal to make. We won't hunt in
couples, but separate, and each will try to bring home something to help
the common fund. Is it agreed?"

"Yes."

"_Au revoir_, then!"

"That fellow has no conscience," thought Graham. "Mine is callous, but
he goes beyond me. Perhaps he is the better off."

Graham shook off his transient dull spirits, and walked on, keeping a
sharp lookout for a chance to fleece somebody. In front of a railroad
ticket office he espied a stolid-looking German, who was trying to read
the placard in the window.

Graham approached him, and said politely, "My friend, perhaps I can help
you. Are you thinking of buying a railroad ticket?"

The German turned, and his confidence was inspired by the friendly
interest of Graham's manner.

"I go to Minnesota," he said, "where my brother live."

"Exactly, and you want a ticket to go there?"

"Yes, I want a ticket. Do they sell him here?"

"No," said Graham. "That is, they do sell tickets here; but they ask too
much."

"I will not pay too much," said the German, shaking his head
decisively.

"Of course not; I will take you to a cheaper place."

"That is good," said the German, well pleased. "It is luck I meet mit a
friend like you."

"Yes," said Graham, linking his arm in that of his new acquaintance. "I
don't like to see a worthy man cheated. Come with me. How much money
have you?"

This inquiry ought to have excited the suspicions of the German; but he
was trustful, and answered promptly, "Two hundred dollar."

Graham's eyes sparkled.

"If I could only get the whole of it," he thought. But that didn't seem
easy.

They walked through street after street till Graham stopped in front of
an office.

"Now," said he, "give me your money, and I will buy the ticket."

"How much money?" asked his new acquaintance.

"I don't know exactly," said Graham carelessly. "Just hand me your
pocketbook, and I will pay what is needed."

But here the German's characteristic caution came in.

"I will go with you," he said.

"If you do, I can't get the tickets so cheap. The agent is a friend of
mine, and if he thinks it is for me he will give it to me for less.
Don't give me all your money. Fifty dollars will do. I will buy the
ticket, and bring you the rest of the money."

This seemed plausible enough, and Graham would have got what he asked
for, but for the interference of Tom, who had come up just in time to
hear Graham's proposal. He had no difficulty in comprehending his
purpose.

"Don't give him the money," he said. "He will cheat you."

Both Graham and his intended victim wheeled round, and looked at our
hero.

"Clear out of here, you young vagabond!" said Graham angrily.

"This man wants to cheat you," persisted Tom. "Don't give him your
money."

The bewildered foreigner looked from one to the other.

"This is no ticket office," said Tom. "I will lead you to one, and you
shall buy a ticket for yourself."

"He wants to swindle you," said Graham quickly.

"You shall keep your money in your own hands," said Tom. "I don't want
it."

"I go with you, my young friend," said the German, convinced by Tom's
honest face. "The other man may be all right, but I go with you."

Graham protested in vain. His victim went off with Tom, who saw that he
was provided with the ticket he wanted. His new friend tried to force a
dollar upon him; but this Tom steadily refused.

"I'll get even with you yet!" said Graham furiously; but our hero was
not disturbed by this menace.

Vincent, meantime, was making a tour of observation, ready for any
adventure that might put an honest or dishonest penny into his pocket.
About half an hour later he found himself on the leading retail street
in Cincinnati. In front of him walked a lady, fashionably attired,
holding a mother-of-pearl portemonnaie carelessly in her hand. He
brushed by her, and at the same moment the pocketbook was snatched from
her hand.

The lady screamed, and instinctively clutched Vincent by the arm.

"This man has robbed me, I think," she said. The crowd began to gather
about Vincent, and he saw that he was cornered. Among the crowd,
unluckily for himself, was Tom. By a skilful movement Vincent thrust the
portemonnaie into our hero's pocket.

"You are mistaken, madam," he said coolly; "I saw that boy take your
money."

Instantly two men seized Tom.

"Search him," said Vincent, "and see it I am not right."

The portemonnaie was taken from Tom's pocket, amid the hootings of the
crowd.

"So young, and yet so wicked!" said the lady regretfully.

"I didn't take the money, madam," protested Tom, his face scarlet with
surprise and mortification.

"Don't believe him, ma'am. I saw him take it," said Vincent virtuously.

Poor Tom looked from one to another; but all faces were unfriendly. It
was a critical time for him.




CHAPTER XVII.

TOM'S ARREST.


To one who is scrupulously honest a sudden charge of dishonesty is
almost overwhelming. Now, Tom was honest, not so much because he had
been taught that honesty was a virtue, as by temperament and instinct.
Yet here he saw himself surrounded by hostile faces, for a crowd soon
collected. Not one believed in his innocence, not even the lady, who
thought it was such a pity that he was "so young and yet so wicked."

"Will somebody call a policeman?" asked Vincent.

A policeman soon made his appearance. He was a stout, burly man, and
pushed his way through the crowd without ceremony.

"What's the row?" he inquired.

"This boy has picked a lady's pocket," exclaimed Vincent.

The officer placed his hand roughly on Tom's shoulder.

"You were a little too smart, young feller!" said he. "You must come
along with me."

"I didn't take the money," protested Tom, pale, but in a firm voice.

"That's too thin," said Vincent, with a sneer.

"Yes, it's too thin," repeated two or three in the crowd.

"It's true," said Tom.

"Perhaps you'll tell us how the money came in your pocket," suggested a
bystander.

"That man put it in," answered Tom, indicating Vincent.

The latter shrugged his shoulders.

"He says so, because I exposed him," he remarked, turning to the crowd.

"Of course; that's a common game," interposed the policeman.

"Have you any reason for what you say, my boy?" asked a quiet-looking
man, with a pleasant face.

"Of course he hasn't," replied Vincent hastily.

"I spoke to the boy, sir."

"I have a reason," answered Tom. "A friend of this man roomed with me at
Pittsburg, and during the night tried to rob me. We were both passengers
on the _River Belle_ on the last trip. During the trip he entered our
stateroom, and stole a wallet from my roommate. This man slyly put it
into my pocket, in order to escape suspicion."

"It's a lie!" exclaimed Vincent uneasily. "Gentlemen, the boy is very
artful, and the greatest liar out."

"Of course he is!" assented the policeman. "Come along, young feller!"

"Wait a minute," said the quiet man. "Have you any proof of your
statements, my boy, except your own word?"

"Yes, sir; my roommate will tell you the same thing."

"Who is he? Where can he be found?"

"He is Mr. Nicholas Waterbury, of Marietta. He is now at the Burnet
House."

"That's all gammon!" said the officer roughly. "Come along. I can't wait
here all day."

"Don't be in a hurry, officer," said the quiet man. "I know Mr.
Waterbury, and I believe the boy's story is correct."

"It ain't any of your business!" said the officer insolently. "The boy's
a thief, and I'm goin' to lock him up."

"Look out, sir!" said the quiet man sternly. "You are overstepping the
limits of your duty, and asserting what you have no possible means of
knowing. There is reason to believe that this man"--pointing out
Vincent--"is the real thief. I call upon you to arrest him."

"I don't receive no orders from you, sir," said the policeman. "I'm more
likely to take you along."

"That's right, officer," said Vincent approvingly. "The man is
interfering with you in the exercise of your duty. You have a perfect
right to arrest him."

"I have a great mind to," said the officer, who was one of the many who
are puffed up by a little brief authority, and lose no opportunity of
exercising it.

The quiet man did not seem in the least alarmed. He smiled, and said,
"Perhaps, officer, it might be well for you to inquire my name, before
proceeding to arrest me."

"Who are you?" demanded the officer insolently.

"I am Alderman Morris."

A great change came over the policeman. He knew now that the quiet man
before him was President of the Board of Aldermen, and he began to be
alarmed, remembering with what rudeness he had treated him.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he said humbly; "I didn't know you."

"What is your name, sir?" demanded the alderman, in a tone of authority.

"Jones, sir."

"How long have you been on the force?"

"Six months, your honor."

"Then you ought to be better fitted for your position by this time."

"I hope you won't take no offense at what I said, not knowing you,
alderman."

"That's no personal offense, but I object to your pronouncing upon the
guilt of parties arrested when you know nothing of the matter."

"Shall I take the boy along, sir?"

"Yes, and this man also. I don't wish to interfere with the exercise of
justice, but it is my opinion that the boy is innocent."

"I protest against this outrage," said Vincent nervously. "Am I to be
punished because I expose a thief?"

"Come along, sir," said the policeman. "The alderman says so."

"I appeal to the gentlemen present," said Vincent, hoping for a forcible
deliverance.

"Madam," said the alderman to the lady who had been robbed, "did you see
the boy take your pocketbook?"

"No, sir! I thought it was the man, till he told me it was the boy, and
the money was found on the boy."

"I should think that told the story," said Vincent. "Any man here might
be arrested as soon as I. Fellow citizens, is this a free country, where
a man of reputation can be summarily arrested at the bidding of another?
If so, I would rather live under a monarchy."

There was a murmur of approval, and some sympathy was excited.

"There will be no injustice done, sir," said the alderman. "I propose to
follow up this matter myself. I will see my friend, Mr. Waterbury, and
I can soon learn whether the boy's story is correct."

"He may lie, too!" said Vincent, who had very good reasons for fearing
Mr. Waterbury's testimony.

"Mr. Waterbury is a gentleman of veracity," said Alderman Morris
sharply. "I see you recognize the name."

"Never heard of him," said Vincent. "I suppose it is one of the boy's
confederates."

"I will answer for him," said the alderman. "My boy," he said, "I hope
we shall be able to prove your innocence. Be under no anxiety. Go with
the officer, and I will seek out Mr. Waterbury. Officer, take care to
treat him gently."

"All right, sir."

There was no fear now that Tom would be roughly treated. He had too much
regard for his own interest, and his tenure of office, to disoblige a
man so influential and powerful as Alderman Morris.

Notwithstanding there had been such a turn in his favor, Tom felt
humiliated to feel that he was under restraint, and his cheeks burned
with shame as he walked beside the officer. Vincent, upon the other
side, gnashed his teeth with rage, as he thought of his unexpected
detention. Just as revenge was in his grasp, he had been caught in the
same trap which he had so willingly set for Tom.

"That Alderman Morris is a fool!" he said. "He isn't fit to be in
office."

"Don't you say nothin' against him!" said the policeman. "It won't be
best for you. He's one of our leadin' citizens, Alderman Morris is."

"He snubbed you!" sneered Vincent. "He talked to you as if you were a
dog."

"No, he didn't. You'd better shut up, prisoner."

"Oh, well, if you're willing to be trampled upon, it isn't any of my
business. I wouldn't stand it, alderman or no alderman. Such things
wouldn't be allowed in New York, where I live."

"Oh, New York's a model city, so I've heard," retorted the policeman, in
a tone of sarcasm. "We don't pretend to come up to New York."

Finding that nothing was to be gained by continuing his attacks upon
the alderman, Vincent became silent; but his brain was active. He felt
that Mr. Waterbury's testimony would be fatal to him. He must escape, if
possible. Soon a chance came. He seized his opportunity, shook off the
grasp of the officer, and darted away. Not knowing what to do with Tom,
who was also under arrest, the officer paused an instant, then, leaving
our hero, hastened in pursuit.

"Now's your chance to escape, boy!" said a sympathetic bystander to him.

"I don't want to escape," answered Tom. "I want my innocence proved. I
shall stay where I am till the officer returns."

And he kept his word. Ten minutes later the officer came back, puffing
and panting, after an unsuccessful pursuit; prepared to find Tom gone
also.

"What, are you there?" he asked, staring in wonder.

"Yes," said Tom; "I don't want to escape. I shall come out right."

"I believe you will," said the officer, with a revulsion of sentiment in
Tom's favor. "Just walk along beside me, and I won't take hold of you.
I'm not afraid of your running away now."




CHAPTER XVIII.

TOM GETS OUT OF HIS DIFFICULTY.


Tom had not been long in the station-house when Alderman Morris,
accompanied by Mr. Waterbury, entered. The latter looked at Tom with a
humorous smile.

"You don't appear to get along very well without my guardianship, Tom,"
he said.

"No, sir," answered Tom. "The trouble is, some of my other friends can't
let me alone."

"Was it in a fit of emotional insanity that you relieved the lady of her
pocketbook?" asked Mr. Waterbury, bent on keeping up the joke.

"If I ever do such a thing, you may be sure it is because I am insane,"
answered Tom positively.

"I shall," said Mr. Waterbury seriously. "Now, where is this precious
acquaintance of ours who got you into this scrape?"

"He has escaped."

"Escaped!" exclaimed the alderman hastily. "How is that?"

Here the policeman took up the story, and explained that Vincent had
taken advantage of his double charge to effect his escape.

"I suppose, officer," said Mr. Waterbury, "that you were unwilling to
leave Tom in order to pursue him."

"I did leave him, sir, and didn't expect to find him when I got back.
But there he was, waiting for me as quietly as--anything."

"Didn't you feel tempted to escape, too, my boy?"

"Why should I, sir? I had done nothing; I had nothing to fear."

"Innocence is not always a protection, for justice is sometimes far from
clear-sighted. In the present case, however, I think you will not suffer
for your confidence."

Tom was not brought to trial. Mr. Waterbury's statement of what had
passed on the voyage of the _River Belle_ was held to be sufficient to
establish Tom's innocence, and he was allowed to walk out with Mr.
Waterbury.

"Have you anything to do this morning, Tom?" asked his friend.

"No, sir."

"Then come around and dine with me at the Burnet House. Afterward we
will call upon your friends, the Watsons."

Mrs. Watson and Jennie had altered their plans and gone to a
boarding-house, preferring that to a hotel.

"That will be agreeable to me, sir."

The dinner was excellent, and Tom did full justice to it.

"At one time this morning, Tom, it looked as if you would dine at quite
a different place," said Mr. Waterbury, when they were eating the
dessert.

"Yes, sir."

"You won't think much of Cincinnati's hospitality, eh, Tom?"

"Any place would be the same, where Vincent was," returned Tom.

"Very true; he and Graham will bring discredit on any city which they
adopt as a home. How long shall you remain here?"

"I should like to stay long enough to see something of the city, but I
cannot afford it. I must reach California as soon as possible."

"No doubt you are right, in your circumstances. I have been inquiring
for you, and find that St. Joseph, in Missouri, is the usual
starting-point for travelers across the plains. I find an acquaintance
here in the hotel, who will start to-morrow for that place. I have
mentioned you to him, and he says he shall be glad to have your company
so far. Whether you keep together afterward will depend upon
yourselves."

"I shall be glad to have company, sir," said Tom. Though manly and
self-reliant, he realized that it was quite a serious undertaking for a
boy of his age to make the trip alone. He was not sure of meeting with
another friend like Mr. Waterbury, and there might be danger of falling
in with another brace of worthies like Graham and Vincent.

"My friend's name is Ferguson--a Scotchman, rather sedate, but entirely
trustworthy. I will introduce you this evening."

"Thank you, sir."

After dinner they walked to Mrs. Watson's boarding-house. Somewhere on
Vine Street, Mr. Waterbury paused in front of a jewelry store.

"I want to step in here a minute, Tom," he said.

"Certainly, sir."

Tom remained near the door, while Mr. Waterbury went into the back part
of the store, where he was occupied for a few minutes with one of the
proprietors. When he came back he held a small box in his hand.

"Please carry this for me, Tom," he said.

"With pleasure, sir."

They went out into the street together.

"Do you know what is in the box, Tom?" asked Mr. Waterbury.

"No, sir," answered our hero, a little surprised at the question.

"You didn't see what I was buying, then?" continued Mr. Waterbury.

"No, sir; I was watching the crowds on the sidewalk."

"If you have any curiosity, you may open the box."

Previously Tom had felt no curiosity. Now he did feel a little.

Opening the box, his eye rested on a neat silver watch, with a chain
attached. The case was a pretty one, and Tom glanced at it with
approval.

"It is very pretty, sir," he said; "but I thought you had a watch
already."

"I didn't buy it for myself."

"For your son?" asked Tom innocently.

Mr. Waterbury smiled.

"I thought of asking your acceptance of it," he said.

"You don't mean that you are going to give it to me, sir?" said Tom
eagerly.

"If you will accept it."

"How kind you are, Mr. Waterbury!" exclaimed Tom gratefully. "There is
nothing in the world that I should like so much. How can I thank you?"

"By considering it a proof of my interest in you. I was sure you would
like it. Before I had reached your age the great object of my ambition
was a watch. I received one from my uncle, as a gift, on my seventeenth
birthday. I believe I looked at it once in five minutes on an average
during the first day."

"I dare say it will be so with me, sir," said Tom, who, at the moment,
had the watch in his hand, examining it.

"As you are to rough it, I thought it best to get you a hunting-case
watch, because it will be less liable to injury. When you become a man I
hope you will be prosperous enough to buy a gold watch and chain, if you
prefer them. While you are a boy silver will be good enough."

"Gold wouldn't correspond very well with my circumstances," said Tom. "I
didn't dream of even having a silver watch and chain for years to come.
I shall write home this evening, and tell mother of my good luck."

"Will you mention that you have already been under arrest?" asked Mr.
Waterbury, smiling.

Tom shook his head.

"I am not proud of that," he answered; "and it would only trouble them
at home to have an account of it. When I get home, I may mention it
sometime."

"Better put on your watch and chain, Tom, before we reach Mrs.
Watson's."

Tom needed no second invitation.

"It's lucky mother put a watch-pocket in my vest," he said. "We didn't
either of us suppose there would be any occasion for it; but I asked her
to do it."

In a nice-looking brick boarding-house--for brown-stone houses were not
then often to be found--Tom and his friend found Mrs. Watson and Jennie.

"I'm so glad to see you, Tom," said Jennie. "I've missed you awfully."

"Thank you," said Tom. "I've come to bid you good-by."

"Good-by! You don't mean that?"

"I expect to start for St. Joseph to-morrow. I am in a hurry to get to
California."

"That's real mean. I don't see why you can't stay in Cincinnati a week."

"I should like to."

"Then why don't you?" persisted the young girl.

"Jennie," said her mother, "we must remember that Thomas is not
traveling for pleasure. He is going to California to seek his fortune.
It won't do for him to linger on his way."

"A week won't make much difference; will it, Tom?"

"I am afraid it will, Jennie. Besides, a friend of Mr. Waterbury will
start to-morrow, and has agreed to take me with him."

"I suppose you've got to go, then," said Jennie regretfully. "Oh, where
did you get that watch, Tom?"

"A kind friend gave it to me."

"Who do you mean--Mr. Graham?" she asked archly.

"He would be more likely to relieve me of it. No, it is Mr. Waterbury."

"I am going to kiss you for that, Mr. Waterbury," said Jennie
impulsively; and she suited the action to the word.

"What will Mr. Waterbury think, Jennie?" said her mother.

"He thinks himself well repaid for his gift," answered that gentleman,
smiling; "and half inclined to give Tom another watch."

"Isn't it my turn, now?" asked Tom, with a courage at which he afterward
rather wondered; but he was fast getting rid of his country bashfulness.

"I never kiss boys," said Jennie demurely.

"Then I will grow into a man as fast as I can," said Tom, "and give
somebody a watch, and then---- But that will be a good while to wait."

"I may kiss you good-by," said Jennie, "if I feel like it."

She did feel like it, and Tom received the kiss.

"It strikes me, Tom," said Mr. Waterbury, as they were walking home,
"that you and Jennie are getting along fast."

"She kissed you first," said Tom, blushing.

"But the kiss she gave me was wholly on your account."

"She seems just like a sister," said Tom. "She's a tip-top girl."




CHAPTER XIX.

A MISSOURI TAVERN.


The next day Tom started on his way. His new companion, Donald Ferguson,
was a sedate Scotchman, and a thoroughly reliable man. He was possessed
to the full of the frugality characteristic of the race to which he
belonged, and, being more accustomed to traveling than Tom, saved our
hero something in the matter of expense. He was always ready to talk of
Scotland, which he evidently thought the finest country in the world. He
admitted that Glasgow was not as large a city as London, but that it was
more attractive. As for New York, that city bore no comparison to the
chief city of Scotland.

"You must go to Scotland some time, Tom," he said. "If you can't visit
but one country in the Old World, go to Scotland."

Privately Tom was of opinion that he should prefer to visit England; but
he did not venture to hurt the feelings of his fellow-traveler by saying
so.

"I wonder, Mr. Ferguson," he could not help saying one day, "that you
should have been willing to leave Scotland, since you so much prefer it
to America."

"I'll tell you, my lad," answered the Scotchman. "I would rather live in
Scotland than anywhere else on God's footstool; but I won't be denying
that it is a poor place for a man to make money, if compared with a new
country like this."

"There are no gold-mines, I suppose, sir?"

"No; and the land is not as rich as the land here. It is rich in
historical associations; but a man, you know, can't live on those," he
added shrewdly.

"No, I should think not," said Tom. "It would be pretty dry diet. How
long have you been in the country, Mr. Ferguson?"

"A matter of three months only, my lad. It's the gold-mines that brought
me over. I read of them in the papers at home, and I took the first ship
across the Atlantic."

"Have you a family, Mr. Ferguson?"

"I've got an old mother at home, my lad, who looks to me for support. I
left fifty pounds with her when I came away. It'll last her, I'm
thinkin', till I can send her some from California."

"Then Mr. Ferguson, you are like me," said Tom. "I am going to
California to work for my father and mother. Father is poor, and I have
brothers and sisters at home to provide for. I hope I shall succeed, for
their sake."

"You will, my lad," said the Scotchman, in a tone of calm confidence.
"It is a noble purpose, and if you keep to it God will bless you in your
undertaking, and give you a good fortune."

"I hope we shall both be fortunate."

"I have no fear. I put my trust in the Lord, who is always ready to help
those who are working for him."

Tom found that Mr. Ferguson, though his manner was dry and unattractive,
was a religious man, and he respected and esteemed him for his excellent
traits. He was not a man to inspire warm affection, but no one could
fail to respect him. He felt that he was fortunate in having such a man
for his companion, and he was glad that Mr. Ferguson appeared to like
him in turn.

He also found that the Scotchman, though a man of peace, and very much
averse to quarreling, was by no means deficient in the trait of personal
courage.

One evening they arrived at a small tavern in a Missouri town. Neither
Tom nor his companion particularly liked the appearance of the place nor
its frequenters, but it appeared to be the only place of entertainment
in the settlement.

The barroom, which was the only public room set apart for the use of the
guests, was the resort of a party of drunken roisterers, who were
playing poker in the corner, and betting on the game. At the elbow of
each player was set a glass of whisky, and the end of each game was
marked by a fresh glass all around.

Tom and Mr. Ferguson took a walk after supper, and then sat down quietly
at a little distance from the card-players, attracting at first but
little attention from them.

Presently, at the close of a game, glasses were ordered for the party,
at the expense of those who had suffered defeat.

"What'll you have, strangers?" inquired a tipsy fellow, with an Indian
complexion and long black hair, staggering toward Ferguson.

"Thank you, sir," said the Scotchman; "but I don't drink."

"Don't drink!" exclaimed the former, in evident surprise. "What sort of
a man, pray, may you be?"

"I am a temperance man," said Ferguson, adding indiscreetly, "and it
would be well for you all if you would shun the vile liquor which is
destroying soul and body."

"---- your impudence!" ejaculated the other, in a rage. "Do you dare to
insult gentlemen like us?"

"I never insult anybody," said the Scotchman calmly. "What I have said
is for your good, and you would admit it if you were sober."

"Do you dare to say I'm drunk?" demanded the man, in a fury.

"Mr. Ferguson," said Tom, in a low voice, "I wouldn't provoke him if I
were you."

But the Scotchman was no coward, and, though generally prudent, he was
too fond of argument to yield the point.

"Of course, you're drunk," he said calmly. "If you will reflect, you
show all the signs of a man that has taken too much liquor. Your face is
flushed, your hand is unsteady, and----"

He was interrupted by a volley of execrations from the man whom he was
coolly describing, and the latter, in a fit of fury, struck the
Scotchman in the face. Had the blow been well directed it would, for
the time, have marred the small share of personal beauty with which
nature had endowed Mr. Ferguson; but it glanced aside and just struck
him on his prominent cheek-bone.

"A ring! a ring!" shouted the men in the corner, jumping to their feet
in excitement. "Let Jim and the Scotchman fight it out."

"Gentlemen," said Mr. Ferguson, "I don't wish to fight with your friend.
He is drunk, as you can see plainly enough. I don't wish to fight with a
drunken man."

"Who says I am drunk?" demanded the champion of whisky. "Let me get at
him."

But his friends were now holding him back. They wanted to see a square
fight, according to rule. It would prove, in their opinion, a pleasant
little excitement.

"I meant no offense," said Ferguson; "I only told the truth."

"You are a ---- liar!" exclaimed the man, known as Jim.

"I do not heed the words of a man in your condition," said the Scotchman
calmly.

"Pull his nose, Jim! Make him fight!" exclaimed the friends of the
bully. "We'll back you!"

The hint was taken. Jim staggered forward, and, seizing the Scotchman's
prominent nose, gave it a violent tweak.

Now there are few men, with or without self-respect, who can calmly
submit to an insult like this. Certainly Mr. Donald Ferguson was not one
of them. The color mantled his high cheek-bones, and anger gained
dominion over him. He sprang to his feet, grasped the bully in his
strong arms, dashed him backward upon the floor of the barroom, and,
turning to the companions of the fallen man, he said, "Now come on, if
you want to fight. I'll take you one by one, and fight the whole of you,
if you like."

Instead of being angry, they applauded his pluck. They cared little for
the fate of their champion, but were impressed by the evident strength
of the stranger.

"Stranger," said one of them, "you've proved that you're a man of honor.
We thought you were a coward. It's a pity you don't drink. What may your
name be?"

"Donald Ferguson."

"Then, boys, here's to the health of Mr. Ferguson. He's a bully boy, and
no coward."

"Gentlemen," said the Scotchman, "it's a compliment you mean, no doubt,
and I'm suitably thankful. If you'll allow me, I'll drink your health in
a liquor which will not injure any one. I'll wish you health and
prosperity in a glass of cold water, if the barkeeper happens to have
any of that beverage handy. Tom, join with me in the toast."

Tom did so, and the speech was well received.

"As for this gentleman," said Mr. Ferguson, addressing Jim, who had
struggled to his feet, and was surveying the scene in rather a
bewildered way, "I hope he won't harbor malice; I've only got even with
him. We may as well forgive and forget."

"That's the talk! Jim, drink the stranger's health!"

Jim looked a little doubtful, but when a glass of whisky was put into
his hand he could not resist the seductive draft, and tossed it down.

"Now shake hands!" said one of the players.

"With all my heart," said Ferguson, and the two shook hands, to the
great delight of the company.

"You got off pretty well, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom, when they retired for
the night.

"Yes, my lad, better than I expected. I thought once I would have to
fight the whole pack. Poor fellows! I pity them. They are but slaves to
their appetites. I hope, my lad, you'll never yield to a like
temptation."

"No fear for me, Mr. Ferguson. I feel as you do on the subject."

The journey continued till one day, about noon, they reached the town of
St, Joseph, popularly called St. Joe.




CHAPTER XX.

ST. JOE.


St. Joe was at that time the fitting-out point for overland parties
bound for California. As a matter of course it presented a busy,
bustling appearance, and seemed full of life and movement. There was a
large transient population, of a very miscellaneous character. It
included the thrifty, industrious emigrant, prepared to work hard and
live poorly, till the hoped-for competence was attained; but there was
also the shiftless adventurer, whose chief object was to live without
work, and the unscrupulous swindler, who was ready, if opportunity
offered, to appropriate the hard earnings of others.

"It's a lively place, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom.

"It is, indeed, my young friend," said the cautious Scot; "but it is a
place, to my thinking, where it behooves a man to look well to his
purse."

"No doubt you are right, Mr. Ferguson. I have learned to be cautious
since my adventure with Graham and Vincent."

"There's many like them in the world, Tom. They are like lions, going
about seeking whom they may devour."

St. Joseph could not at that time boast any first-class hotels. Inns and
lodging-houses it had in plenty. At one of these--a two-story building,
dignified by the title of "The Pacific Hotel"--our hero and his Scotch
friend found accommodations. They were charged two dollars and a half
per day--the same price they charged at first-class hotels in New York
and Boston, while their rooms and fare were very far from luxurious. The
landlord was a stout, jolly host, with a round, good-natured face.

"You and your son will room together, I suppose," he said.

"He isn't my son, but a young friend of mine," said Mr. Ferguson.

"I thought he didn't look much like you," said the landlord.

"I am hard and weather-beaten, while he is young and fresh."

"Well, gentlemen, I wish you both good luck. What will you take? I have
a superior article of whisky that I can recommend."

"Thank you, but I beg you will excuse me, sir," said Ferguson. "I never
drink."

"Nor I," said Tom; "but I am much obliged to you all the same."

"Well, that beats me," said the landlord. "Why, you don't know what's
good. You ain't a minister, are you?" turning to Ferguson.

"I have not that high distinction, my friend. I am an unworthy member of
the church of Scotland."

"I don't think your countrymen generally refuse whisky."

"So much the worse for them. They are only too fond of it. My own
brother died a miserable death, brought on by his love of liquor."

"Then I won't press you; but I say, strangers, you won't find many of
your way of thinking in the country you're going to."

"I don't doubt he's right, Tom," said Ferguson to Tom, as they entered
the chamber assigned to them. "We may not be together always. I hope you
won't be led away by them that offer you strong drink. It would be the
ruin of you, boy."

"Don't fear for me, Mr. Ferguson. I have no taste for it."

"Sometimes it's hard to refuse."

"It won't be hard for me."

"I am glad to hear you say that, my lad. You are young, strong, and
industrious. You'll succeed, I'll warrant, if you steer clear of that
quicksand."

Later in the day the two friends began to make inquiries about overland
travel. They had no wish to remain long at St. Joe. Both were impatient
to reach the land of gold, and neither cared to incur the expense of
living at the hotel any longer than was absolutely necessary. Luckily
this probably would not be long, for nearly every day a caravan set out
on the long journey, and doubtless they would be able to join on
agreeing to pay their share of the expenses. It was a great undertaking,
for the distance to be traversed was over two thousand miles, through an
unsettled country, some of it a desert, with the chances of an attack by
hostile Indians, and the certainty of weeks, and perhaps months, of
privation and fatigue. Mr. Donald Ferguson looked forward to it with
some apprehension; for, with characteristic Scotch caution, he counted
the cost of whatever he undertook, and did not fail to set before his
mind all the contingencies and dangers attending it.

"It's a long journey we're going on, my lad," he said, "and we may not
reach the end of it in safety."

"It isn't best to worry about that, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom cheerfully.

"You are right, my lad. It's not for the best to worry, but it is well
to make provision for what may happen. Now, if anything happens to me, I
am minded to make you my executor."

"But don't you think I am too young, Mr. Ferguson?"

"You are o'er young, I grant, but you are a lad of good parts,
temperate, steady, and honest. I have no other friend I feel like
trusting."

"I hope, Mr. Ferguson, there will be no occasion to render you any such
service, but whatever I can I will do."

"It will be very simple. You will take my money, and see that it is sent
to my mother, in Glasgow. I will give you her address now, and then, if
any sudden fate overtakes me, there will be no trouble. You will know
just what to do."

Tom was flattered by this mark of confidence. It was evident that the
cautious Scotchman had formed a very favorable opinion of him, or he
would not have selected so young a boy for so important a trust.

"Will you do the same for me, Mr. Ferguson?" he asked, with the sudden
reflection that, young as he was, there was no absolute certainty of his
living to reach California.

"Surely I will, my lad."

"If I should die I should want any money I might have left sent to my
father."

"Give me his address, my lad, and it shall be done. It is a good
precaution, and we shan't either of us die the sooner for doing our
duty, to the best of our ability, by those who would mourn our loss."

Tom and his friend instituted inquiries, and ascertained that two days
later a caravan was to start on its way across the continent. They
ascertained, also, that the leader of the expedition was a pioneer named
Fletcher, who was making his home at the California Hotel. They made
their way thither, and were fortunate enough to find Mr. Fletcher at
home. He was a stout, broad-shouldered man, a practical farmer, who was
emigrating from Illinois. Unlike the majority of emigrants, he had his
family with him, namely, a wife, and four children, the oldest a boy of
twelve.

"My friend," said Ferguson, "I hear that you are soon leaving here with
a party for California."

"I leave day after to-morrow," answered Fletcher.

"Is your party wholly made up?"

"We are about full; but we might receive one or two more."

"My young friend and I wish to join some good party, as we cannot afford
to remain here, and we are anxious to get to work as soon as possible."

Some care needed to be exercised in the choice of a party, as there were
some who would only give trouble and annoyance, or perhaps fail to pay
their proper share of the expenses. But Ferguson's appearance was
sufficient guarantee of his reliability, and no one was likely to object
to Tom.

"Of course," added Ferguson, "we are ready to bear our share of the
expense."

"Then you can come," said Fletcher. "You will both need revolvers, for
we may be attacked by Indians, and must be able to defend ourselves."

"Certainly, we will do our part, if need be."

This was an expense which Tom had not foreseen; but he at once saw the
importance of being armed when crossing such a country as lay before
them, and went with Ferguson to make the needful purchase. His Scotch
friend instructed him in the method of using his new weapon, and Tom
felt a boy's natural pride in his new acquisition. He felt years older
then he did on the morning when he left his country home. He had gained
some knowledge of the world, and felt a greater confidence in himself on
that account. He looked forward to the remainder of his journey with
pleasurable excitement, and lost no time in making the necessary
preparations.




CHAPTER XXI.

HOW THINGS WENT ON AT HOME.


While Tom was slowly making his way westward, there was one place where
tidings from him were anxiously awaited, and where nightly prayers were
offered for his health and safe progress. Of course this was the dear,
though humble, farmhouse, which had been his home.

Twice a week Tom wrote, and his letters were cheerful and reassuring.

          "Don't trouble yourself about me, dear mother"--he
          wrote from Cincinnati. "I am making friends, and
          learning how to travel. I feel years older, and
          rely much more on myself than when, an inexperienced
          boy, I bade you good-by. I am a thousand miles from
          you, and the longest and most difficult part of the
          journey lies before me; but with health and
          strength, and prudence, I hope to arrive in good
          condition at my destination. As to health I never
          felt better in my life, and I have taken lessons in
          prudence and caution which will be of essential
          service to me. I have found that a boy who goes out
          into the world to seek his fortune cannot trust
          everybody he falls in with. He will find foes as
          well as friends, and he will need to be on his
          guard.

          "I start to-morrow for St. Joseph, in Missouri,
          going by way of St. Louis. Mr. Donald Ferguson, a
          middle-aged Scotchman, is my companion. A younger
          and livelier companion might prove more agreeable,
          but perhaps not so safe. Mr. Ferguson is old
          enough to be my father, and I shall be guided by
          his judgment where my own is at fault. He is very
          frugal, as I believe his countrymen generally are,
          and that, of course, just suits me. I don't know
          how long I shall be in reaching St. Joseph, but I
          shall write you once or twice on the way. Give my
          love to father, Sarah, Walter, and Harry, and keep
          a great deal for yourself.
                                 "Your loving son,
                                              "TOM."

"Tom is growing manly, Mary," said Mark Nelson to his wife. "It's doing
him good to see a little of the world."

"I suppose it is, Mark," said his wife; "but the more I think of it the
more I feel that he is very young to undertake such a long journey
alone."

"He is young, but it will make a man of him."

"He must be having a tip-top time," said Walter; "I wish I were with
him."

"You would be more of a hindrance than a help to him, Walter," said Mark
Nelson.

"You are only a child, you know," said Sarah, in an elder-sister tone.

"What do you call yourself?" retorted Walter. "You are only two years
older than I am."

"Girls always know more than boys of the same age," said Sarah
condescendingly. "Besides, I haven't said anything about going out to
California."

"No, I should think not. A girl that's afraid of a mouse had better stay
at home."

Walter referred to an incident of the day previous, when the sudden
appearance of a mouse threw Sarah into a panic.

"Are there any mouses in California?" asked little Harry, with interest.

"If there are I could carry a cat with me," returned Sarah
good-humoredly.

Mark Nelson, though he felt Tom was a boy to be trusted, did ask himself
occasionally whether he had been wise in permitting him to leave home
under the circumstances. Suppose he continued in health, there were
doubts of his success. His golden dreams might not be realized. The two
hundred dollars which he had raised for Tom might be lost, and bring in
no return; and this would prove a serious loss to Mark, hampered as he
was already by a heavy mortgage on his farm. Would Squire Hudson be
forbearing, if ill-luck came? This was a question he could not answer.
He only knew that such was not the squire's reputation.

"Well, Mr. Nelson, what do you hear from Tom," asked the squire, one day
about this time. "How far is he on his way?"

"We received a letter from Cincinnati yesterday. He then was about
starting for St. Joseph."

"Does he seem to enjoy the journey?"

"He writes in excellent spirits. He says he has met with good friends."

"Indeed! How does his money hold out?"

"He does not speak of that."

"Oh, well, I dare say he is getting along well;" and the squire walked
on.

"Does he feel interested in Tom, or not?" queried Mark Nelson, as he
looked thoughtfully after the squire, as he walked on with stately
steps, leaning slightly on his gold-headed cane. He might have been
enlightened on this point, if he could have heard a conversation, later
in the day, between Squire Hudson and his son Sinclair.

"I saw Mark Nelson this morning," he observed at the supper table.

"Has he heard from Tom?"

"Yes; his son wrote him from Cincinnati."

"I wish I could go to Cincinnati," grumbled Sinclair; "I think I have a
better right to see the world than Tom Nelson."

"All in good time, my son. Tom is not traveling for pleasure."

"Still, he is getting the pleasure."

"He will have to work hard when he reaches California. Probably he won't
have a cent left when he gets there."

"What will he do then?"

"He must earn money."

"Do you think he will do well, father?"

"He may, and then again he may not," answered the squire judicially.

"If he don't, how is he going to pay you back the money you lent him?"

"I always thought your father was foolish to lend his money to a boy
like that," said Mrs. Hudson querulously.

"Women know nothing about business," said the squire, with an air of
superior wisdom.

"Sometimes men don't know much," retorted his wife.

"If you refer to me, Mrs. Hudson," said her husband, "you need have no
anxiety. I did not lend the money to the boy, but to his father."

"That isn't much better. Everybody knows that Mark Nelson has all that
he can do to get along. His wife hasn't had a new dress for years."

The squire's face grew hard and stern. He had never loved his wife, and
never forgiven Mrs. Nelson, whom he had loved as much as he was capable
of doing, for refusing his hand.

"She has made her bed and she must lie upon it," he said curtly. "She
might have known that Mark Nelson would never be able to provide for
her."

"Perhaps she never had any other offer," said Mrs. Hudson, who was
ignorant of a certain passage of her husband's life.

"Probably she did, for she was a very pretty girl."

"Then she's faded," said Mrs. Hudson, tossing her head.

Squire Hudson did not reply; but as his eyes rested on the sharp,
querulous face of his helpmate, and he compared it mentally with the
pleasant face of Mrs. Nelson, he said to himself that, faded or not, the
latter was still better looking than his wife had been in the days of
her youth. Of course it would not do to say so, for Mrs. Hudson was not
amiable.

"Mark Nelson has given me security," said the squire, returning to the
point under discussion. "I hold a mortgage on his farm for the whole
amount he owes me."

"Do you think you shall have to foreclose, father?" asked Sinclair.

"If Tom does not succeed in California, I probably shall," said the
squire.

"Do you think he will succeed?"

"He may be able to make a living, but I don't think he will be able to
help his father any."

"Then why did you lend him the money?"

"He wanted to go, and was willing to take the risk. I lent the money as
a business operation."

"Suppose Mr. Nelson loses his farm, what will he do?" inquired Sinclair.

"I really don't know," answered the squire, shrugging his shoulders.
"That is no concern of mine."

"Tom wouldn't put on so many airs if his father had to go to the
poorhouse," said Sinclair.

"Does he put on airs?"

"He seems to think he is as good as I am," said Squire Hudson's heir.

"That is perfectly ridiculous," said Mrs. Hudson. "The boy must be a
fool."

"He is no fool," said the squire, who did not allow prejudice to carry
him so far as his wife and son. "He is a boy of very fair abilities; but
I apprehend he will find it harder to make his fortune than he
anticipated. However, time will show."

"Most likely he'll come home in rags, and grow up a day-laborer," said
Sinclair complacently. "When I'm a rich man I'll give him work. He won't
feel like putting on airs, then."

"What a good heart Sinclair has!" said Mrs. Hudson admiringly.

Squire Hudson said nothing. Possibly the goodness of his son's heart was
not so manifest to him.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE YOUNG MAN FROM BOSTON.


Soon after leaving St. Joe, the emigrant train which Tom had joined,
entered the territory of Kansas. At that early day the settlement of
this now prosperous State had scarcely begun. Its rich soil was as yet
unvexed by the plow and the spade, and the tall prairie grass and virgin
forest stretched for many and many a mile westward in undisturbed
loneliness.

One afternoon, toward the setting of the sun, the caravan halted on the
site of the present capital of the State, Topeka. The patient oxen,
wearied with the twenty miles they had traveled, were permitted to
graze. The ten baggage wagons or "ships of the plain," as they were
sometimes called--came to anchor in a sea of verdure. They were ranged
in a circle, the interior space being occupied as a camping-ground. Then
began preparations for supper. Some of the party were sent for water. A
fire was built, and the travelers, with a luxurious enjoyment of rest,
sank upon the grass.

Donald Ferguson looked thoughtfully over the vast expanse of unsettled
prairie, and said to Tom, "It's a great country, Tom. There seems no end
to it."

"That's the way I felt when I was plodding along to-day through the
mud," said Tom, laughing.

"It's because the soil is so rich," said the Scotchman. "It'll be a
great farming country some day, I'm thinking."

"I suppose the soil isn't so rich in Scotland, Mr. Ferguson?"

"No, my lad. It's rocky and barren, and covered with dry heather; but it
produces rare men, for all that."

Mr. Ferguson was patriotic to the backbone. He would not claim for
Scotland what she could not fairly claim; but he was all ready with some
compensating claim.

"How do you stand the walking, Mr. Ferguson?"

"I'm getting used to it."

"Then it's more than I am. I think it's beastly."

These words were not uttered by Tom, but by rather a dandified-looking
young man, who came up limping. He was from Boston, and gave his name as
Lawrence Peabody. He had always lived in Boston, where he had been
employed in various genteel avocations; but in an evil hour he had been
lured from his comfortable home by the seductive cry of gold, and,
laying down his yardstick, had set out for California across the plains.
He was a slender young man, with limbs better fitted for dancing than
for tramping across the prairie, and he felt bitterly the fatigue of the
journey.

"Are you tired, Mr. Peabody?" asked Tom.

"I am just about dead. I didn't bargain for walking all the way across
the prairies. Why couldn't old Fletcher let me ride?"

"The oxen have had all they could do to-day to draw the wagons through
the mud."

"Look at those boots," said the Bostonian ruefully, pointing to a pair
of light calfskin boots, which were so overlaid with mud that it was
hard to tell what was their original color. "I bought those boots in
Boston only two weeks ago. Everybody called them stylish. Now they are
absolutely disreputable."

"It seems to me, my friend," said the Scotchman, "that you did not show
much sagacity in selecting such boots for your journey. My young friend,
Tom, is much better provided."

"His boots are cowhide," said Mr. Lawrence Peabody disdainfully. "Do
you think I would wear cowhide boots?"

"You would find them more serviceable, Mr. Peabody," said Tom. "Besides,
I don't believe anybody could tell the difference now."

"How much did you pay for them?" asked the Bostonian.

"A dollar and a half."

"Humph! I thought so," returned Peabody contemptuously. "We don't wear
cowhide boots in Boston."

"You are not in Boston now."

"I wish I was," said Peabody energetically. "I wouldn't have started if
I had known what was before me. I expected to travel like a gentleman,
instead of wading through this cursed mud till I'm ready to drop. Look
at my pantaloons, all splashed with mire. What would my friends say if I
should appear in this rig on Washington Street?"

"They might take you for a bog-trotter," said Tom, smiling.

"I have always been particular about my appearance," said Peabody
plaintively. "'He looks just as if he'd come out of a bandbox,' some of
my lady friends used to say. How do I look now?"

"Like a dirty-handed son of toil," said Tom humorously.

"So do you," retorted Peabody, who felt that this was uncomplimentary.

"I admit it," said Tom; "and that's just what I expect to be. You don't
expect to dig gold with kid gloves on, do you, Mr. Peabody?"

"I wish I had brought some with me," said the Bostonian seriously. "It
would have saved my hands looking so dingy."

"How came you to start for California, my friend?" inquired Ferguson.

"The fact is," said Peabody, "I am not rich. There are members of our
family who are wealthy; but I am not one of the lucky number."

"You were making a living at home, were you not?"

"Yes; but my income was only enough for myself."

"I suppose you were in love, then," said Tom.

"I don't mind saying that I was; confidentially, of course," said Mr.
Peabody complacently.

"Was your love returned?"

"I may say it was. The young lady was the daughter of a merchant prince.
I saw that she loved me, but her father would not consent to our union,
on account of my limited means. I read in the _Transcript_ of the gold
discoveries in California. I determined to go out there, and try my
fortune. If I am successful I will go home, and, with a bag of gold in
each hand, demand the hand of Matilda from her haughty sire. When he
asks me for my credentials, I will point to the gold, and say, 'Behold
them here!'"

"If both your hands are full I don't see how you can point to the bags
of gold," said Tom, who liked to tease the young Bostonian.

"There are a great many things you don't understand," said Mr. Peabody,
irritably.

"He is right, Tom," said Ferguson, with a quiet smile.

"If you are both against me, I will give it up," said Tom. "All I can
say is, I hope you'll get the two bags of gold, Mr. Peabody, and that
you'll get the young lady, too."

Here Fletcher came up, and called upon Tom to assist in preparations for
supper. Our hero readily complied with the request. Indeed, he always
showed himself so obliging that he won the favorable regards of all.

Mr. Peabody continued the conversation with Mr. Ferguson.

"Do you think there's as much gold in California as people say?" he
asked.

"No," answered the Scotchman.

"You don't?" ejaculated the Bostonian, in dismay.

"No; people always magnify when they talk of a new country. Now, my
friend, how much do you expect to get in the first year?"

"Well, about fifty thousand dollars," answered Peabody.

"And how much were you earning in Boston--a thousand dollars?"

"About that," answered Peabody vaguely. In fact, he had been working on
a salary of twelve dollars a week, in a retail dry-goods store on
Washington Street.

"Then you expect to make fifty times as much as at home?"

"Don't you think I will?"

"I have never had such large expectations. If I make three or four
thousand dollars in twelve months it will satisfy me."

"But a man would never get rich, at that rate," said Lawrence Peabody
uneasily.

"I don't know about that. It depends as much on what a man does with his
money, as on the amount he makes," said the prudent Scot.

"I am afraid I did wrong in leaving Boston," said Peabody gloomily. "If
I am to travel many weeks through the mud, and get no more than that, I
shall feel that I am poorly paid."

"You don't feel like my young friend Tom. He is full of hope, and enjoys
everything."

"He hasn't been brought up as I have," said Peabody. "A country boy in
cowhide boots is tough, and don't mind roughing it."

Ferguson did not have a chance to answer, for there was a summons to
supper--a welcome call, that made even Mr. Lawrence Peabody look
cheerful for the time being.




CHAPTER XXIII.

MR. PEABODY'S TROUBLES.


When the party camped for the night the custom was to arrange the
baggage wagons in a semicircle, and provide a resting-place for the
women and children inside. As they were passing through a country
occupied by Indians it was necessary to post one or more sentinels to
keep watch through the night, and give notice of any who might be seen
lurking near the camp. Fortunately, however, an Indian attack was seldom
made at night. The time generally selected was in the morning, when the
party were preparing to start on their day's march. Tom, as a boy, would
have been excused taking his turn; but this did not suit him. He
requested as a favor, that he might stand watch with the rest.

"Can he be relied upon? Is he not too young?" asked Fletcher, the
leader, of Mr. Ferguson.

"You can depend upon him," said the Scotchman confidently. "There's
more manliness in Tom than in many men of twice his years."

"Then I will put his name on the list," said Fletcher.

"That's right. I'll answer for him."

But there was one of the travelers who was by no means eager to stand on
watch. This was Lawrence Peabody, the young man from Boston. He sought
an interview with Fletcher, and asked to be excused.

"On what grounds, Mr. Peabody?" asked Fletcher, surprised.

"It doesn't agree with me to lose my night's sleep," said Peabody. "I am
naturally delicate, and----"

"Your excuse is not satisfactory, Mr. Peabody. We are banded together in
a little community, having mutual rights and mutual obligations. In the
arrangements made for the common safety it is your duty to bear your
part."

"I am willing to provide a substitute," said Peabody eagerly.

"Where will you find a substitute?"

"I have been talking with Tom Nelson. He says he is willing to serve in
my turn."

"He will serve when his own turn comes; that will be all we can expect
of him."

"But he is only a boy. Why should he be expected to take his turn?"

"If he is old enough to be a substitute, he is old enough to stand watch
for himself."

"But, Mr. Fletcher, I am very delicate," protested Lawrence Peabody. "I
must have my regular sleep, or I shall be sick."

"We must take our chances of that, Mr. Peabody."

"I shall be very likely to go to sleep on my post."

"I wouldn't advise you to," said Fletcher seriously. "It might be
dangerous."

"Dangerous!" ejaculated Peabody nervously.

"Precisely. If a lurking Indian should surprise you, you might wake up
to find yourself scalped."

"Good gracious!" exclaimed the Bostonian, his teeth chattering, for he
was not of the stuff of which heroes are made. "Do you--think there is
any danger of that?"

"Considerable, if you neglect your duty."

"But perhaps I can't help falling asleep."

"Mr. Peabody," said Fletcher sternly, "you must keep awake. Not only
your own safety, but that of the whole camp, may depend upon your
vigilance. If you choose to risk your own life, I don't complain of
that, but you shall not imperil ours. I therefore give you notice, that
if you fall asleep on guard you will be drummed out of camp, and left to
shift for yourself."

"But I couldn't find my way on the prairie," said Peabody, very much
alarmed.

"You had better think of that when you are tempted to close your eyes,
Mr. Peabody," replied Fletcher.

Lawrence Peabody walked off, feeling very much disconcerted. Fervently
he wished himself back in Boston, where there are no Indians, and a man
might sleep from one week's end to another without any danger of losing
his scalp.

"What's the matter, Mr. Peabody?" asked Tom, observing his melancholy
appearance.

"I don't think I shall ever live to see California," answered Mr.
Peabody plaintively.

"Why, what's the matter now?" asked Tom, checking an inclination to
laugh; "are you sick?"

"I don't feel very well, Tom. I'm very delicate, and this journey is
almost too much for my strength."

"Oh, cheer up, Mr. Peabody! Think of the gold that awaits you at the end
of the journey."

"It's all that keeps me up, I do assure you. But I am afraid I shall
never live to get there," said Peabody, with a groan.

"Don't think of such things, Mr. Peabody. Of course none of us is sure
of living, but the chances are, that we shall reach California in
health, make our fortunes, and go home rich. At any rate, that's what I
am looking forward to."

"I wouldn't mind so much but for one thing, Tom."

"What is that?"

"Fletcher insists that I shall take my turn in standing guard. If I were
not so delicate I wouldn't mind; but I know I can't stand it. I'll give
you two dollars to take my place, every time my turn comes."

"I am willing, if Mr. Fletcher is," said Tom, who was by no means averse
to making a little extra money.

"But he isn't. I proposed it to him, for I was sure I could arrange with
you; but he refused."

"I suppose," said Tom slyly, "he thought I couldn't fill your place. You
are a brave, resolute man, and I am only a boy."

"Tom--I--I don't mind telling you; but I am afraid I am not brave."

"Oh, nonsense, Mr. Peabody! that is only your modesty."

"But I assure you," said the young Bostonian earnestly, "I am speaking
the truth. If I should see an Indian crawling near the camp I'm really
afraid I should faint."

"You won't know how brave you are till you are put to the test."

"But do you think there is any chance of my being put to the test? Do
you think there are any Indians near?" asked Lawrence Peabody, wiping
the damp perspiration from his brow.

"Of course there must be," said Tom. "We are passing through their
hunting-grounds, you know."

"Why did I ever leave Boston?" said Mr. Peabody sadly.

"You came, as I did, to make your fortune, Mr. Peabody."

"I'm afraid I can't keep awake, Tom; Mr. Fletcher tells me, if I don't,
that he will turn me adrift on the prairie. Isn't that hard?"

"I am afraid it is a necessary regulation. But you won't fall asleep.
Your turn will only come about once in two weeks, and that isn't much."

"The nights will seem very long."

"I don't think so. I think it'll be fun, for my part."

"But suppose--when you are watching--you should all at once see an
Indian, Tom?" said Peabody, with a shiver.

"I think it would be rather unlucky for the Indian," said Tom coolly.

"You are a strange boy, Tom," said Mr. Peabody.

"What makes you think so?"

"You don't seem to care anything about the danger of being scalped."

"I don't believe I should like being scalped any more than you do."

"You might have got off from standing watch; but you asked to be allowed
to."

"That is quite true, Mr. Peabody. I want to meet my fair share of danger
and fatigue."

"You can stand it, for you are strong and tough. You have not my
delicacy of constitution."

"Perhaps that's it," said Tom, laughing.

"Would you mind speaking to Fletcher, and telling him you are willing to
take my place?"

"I will do it, if you wish me to, Mr. Peabody."

"Thank you, Tom; you are a true friend;" and Mr. Peabody wrung the hand
of his young companion.

Tom was as good as his word. He spoke to Fletcher on the subject; but
the leader of the expedition was obdurate.

"Can't consent, my boy," he said. "It is enough for you to take your
turn. That young dandy from Boston needs some discipline to make a man
of him. He will never do anything in a country like California unless
he has more grit than he shows at present. I shall do him a favor by
not excusing him."

Tom reported the answer to Peabody, who groaned in spirit, and nervously
waited for the night when he was to stand watch.




CHAPTER XXIV.

A SAD SIGHT.


A day later, while the wagon-train was slowly winding through a mountain
defile, they encountered a sight which made even the stout-hearted
leader look grave. Stretched out stiff and stark were two figures, cold
in death. They were men of middle age, apparently. From each the scalp
had been removed, thus betraying that the murderers were Indians.

"I should like to come across the red devils who did this," said
Fletcher.

"What would you do with them?" asked Ferguson.

"Shoot them down like dogs, or if I could take them captive they should
dangle upon the boughs of yonder tree."

"I hope I shall be ready to die when my time comes," said Ferguson; "but
I want it to be in a Christian bed, and not at the hands of a dirty
savage."

Just then Lawrence Peabody came up. He had been lagging in the rear, as
usual.

"What have you found?" he inquired, not seeing the bodies at first, on
account of the party surrounding them.

"Come here, and see for yourself, Peabody," said one of the company.

Lawrence Peabody peered at the dead men--he was rather near-sighted--and
turned very pale.

"Is it the Indians?" he faltered.

"Yes, it's those devils. You can tell their work when you see it. Don't
you see that they are scalped?"

"I believe I shall faint," said Peabody, his face becoming of a greenish
hue. "Tom, let me lean on your shoulder. Do--do you think it has been
done lately?"

"Yesterday, probably," said Ferguson. "The bodies look fresh."

"Then the Indians that did it must be near here?"

"Probably."

"These men were either traveling by themselves, or had strayed away from
their party," said Fletcher. "It shows how necessary it is for us to
keep together. In union there is strength."

The bodies were examined. In the pocket of one was found a letter
addressed to James Collins, dated at some town in Maine. The writer
appeared to be his wife. She spoke of longing for the time when he
should return with money enough to redeem their farm from a heavy
mortgage.

"Poor woman!" said Ferguson. "She will wait for her husband in vain. The
mortgage will never be paid through his exertions."

Tom looked sober, as he glanced compassionately at the poor emigrant.

"He came on the same errand that I did," he said. "I hope my journey
will have a happier ending."

"Always hope for the best, Tom," said his Scotch friend. "You will live
happier while you do live, and, if the worst comes, it will be time
enough to submit to it when you must."

"That is good philosophy, Mr. Ferguson."

"Indeed it is, my lad. Don't borrow trouble."

"We must bury these poor men," said Fletcher. "We can't leave them out
here, possibly to be devoured by wild beasts. Who will volunteer for the
service?"

"Come, Peabody," said John Miles, a broad-shouldered giant, who had a
good-natured contempt for the young man from Boston. "Suppose you and I
volunteer."

Lawrence Peabody shrank back in dismay at the unwelcome proposition.

"I couldn't do it," he said, shivering. "I never touched a dead body in
my life. I am so delicate that I couldn't do it, I assure you."

"It's lucky we are not all delicate," said Miles, "or the poor fellows
would be left unburied. I suppose if anything happens to you, Peabody,
you will expect us to bury you?"

"Oh, don't mention such a thing, Mr. Miles," entreated Peabody, showing
symptoms of becoming hysterical. "I really can't bear it."

"It's my belief that nature has made a mistake, and Peabody was meant
for a woman," said Miles, shrugging his shoulders.

"I will assist you, my friend," said the Scotchman. "It's all that
remains for us to do for the poor fellows."

"Not quite all," said Tom. "Somebody ought to write to the poor wife. We
have her address in the letter you took from the pocket."

"Well thought of, my lad," said Fletcher. "Will you undertake it?"

"If you think I can do it properly," said Tom modestly.

"It'll be grievous news, whoever writes it. You can do it as well as
another."

In due time Mrs. Collins received a letter revealing the sad fate of her
husband, accompanied with a few simple words of sympathy.

Over the grave a rude cross was planted, fashioned of two boards, with
the name of James Collins, cut out with a jack-knife, upon them. This
inscription was the work of Miles.

"Somebody may see it who knows Collins," he said.

It happened that, on the second night after the discovery of Collins and
his unfortunate companion, Lawrence Peabody's turn came to stand watch.
He was very uneasy and nervous through the day. In the hope of escaping
the ordeal he so much dreaded he bound a handkerchief round his head.

"What's the matter, Mr. Peabody?" asked Fletcher.

"I've got a fearful headache," groaned Peabody. "It seems to me as if it
would split open."

"Let me feel of it," said Fletcher.

"It doesn't feel hot; it doesn't throb," he said.

"It aches terribly," said Peabody. "I'm very subject to headache. It is
the effect of a delicate constitution."

"The fellow is shamming," said Fletcher to himself; and he felt disgust
rather than sympathy.

"It's a little curious, Mr. Peabody, that this headache should not come
upon you till the day you are to stand on watch," remarked the leader,
with a sarcasm which even the young man from Boston detected.

"Yes, it's strange," he admitted, "and very unlucky, for of course you
won't expect a sick man to watch."

"You don't look at it in the right light, Mr. Peabody. I regard it as
rather lucky than otherwise."

Lawrence Peabody stared.

"I don't understand you, Mr. Fletcher," he said.

"If you have the headache, it will prevent you from going to sleep, and
you remember you expressed yourself as afraid that you might. If you
were quite well, I might feel rather afraid of leaving the camp in your
charge. Now, I am sure you won't fall asleep."

Mr. Peabody listened in dismay. The very plan to which he had resorted
in the hope of evading duty was likely to fasten that duty upon him.

"He'll be well before night," thought Fletcher shrewdly; and he
privately imparted the joke to the rest of the party. The result was
that Mr. Peabody became an object of general attention.

In half an hour the young man from Boston removed his handkerchief from
his head.

"Are you feeling better, Mr. Peabody?" asked Tom.

"Very much better," said Peabody.

"Your headache seems to pass off suddenly."

"Yes, it always does," said the young Bostonian. "I am like mother in
that. She had a delicate constitution, just like mine. One minute she
would have a headache as if her head would split open, and half an hour
afterward she would feel as well as usual."

"You are very fortunate. I was afraid your headache would make it
uncomfortable for you to watch to-night."

"Yes, it would; but, as the captain said, it would have kept me awake.
Now I don't believe I can keep from sleeping on my post."

"Why don't you tell Fletcher so?"

"Won't you tell him, Tom? He might pay more attention to it if you told
him."

"No, Mr. Peabody. You are certainly the most suitable person to speak to
him. What makes you think he would pay more attention to me, who am only
a boy?"

"He seems to like you, Tom."

"I hope he does, but really, Mr. Peabody, you must attend to your own
business."

Fletcher was at the head of the train, walking beside the first wagon.
Hearing hurried steps, he turned, and saw Mr. Lawrence Peabody, panting
for breath.

"Have you got over your headache, Mr. Peabody?" he asked, with a quiet
smile.

"Yes, Mr. Fletcher, it's all gone."

"I am glad to hear it."

"It would have kept me awake to-night, as you remarked," said Peabody.
"Now, I am really afraid that I shall fall asleep."

"That would be bad for you."

"Why so?"

"You remember those two poor fellows whom we found scalped the other
day?"

"I shall never forget them," said Lawrence Peabody, with a shudder.

"Better think of them to-night. If you go to sleep on watch, those very
Indians may serve you in the same way."

"Oh, good gracious!" ejaculated Peabody, turning pale.

"They or some of their tribe are, no doubt, near at hand."

"Don't you think you could excuse me, Mr. Fletcher?" stammered Peabody,
panic-stricken.

"No!" thundered Fletcher, so sternly that the unhappy Bostonian shrank
back in dismay.

For the credit of Boston, it may be said that John Miles--a
broad-shouldered young giant, who did not know what fear was--more
honorably represented the same city.




CHAPTER XXV.

A NIGHT PANIC.


Lawrence Peabody's feelings when night approached were not unlike those
of a prisoner under sentence of death. He was timid, nervous, and gifted
with a lively imagination. His fears were heightened by the sad
spectacle that he had recently witnessed. His depression was apparent to
all; but I regret to say that it inspired more amusement than sympathy.
Men winked at each other as they saw him pass; and, with the exception
of Tom and his Scotch friend, probably nobody pitied the poor fellow.

"He's a poor creature, Tom," said Donald Ferguson; "but I pity him. We
wouldn't mind watching to-night; but I doubt it's a terrible thing to
him."

"I would volunteer in his place, but Mr. Fletcher won't agree to it,"
said Tom.

"He is right. The young man must take his turn. He won't dread it so
much a second time."

"What would the poor fellow do if he should see an Indian?"

"Faint, likely; but that is not probable."

"Mr. Fletcher thinks there are some not far off."

"They don't attack in the night, so I hear."

"That seems strange to me. I should think the night would be most
favorable for them."

"It's their way. Perhaps they have some superstition that hinders."

"I am glad of it, at any rate. I can sleep with greater comfort."

The rest were not as considerate as Tom and Ferguson. They tried,
indeed, to excite still further the fears of the young Bostonian.

"Peabody," said Miles, "have you made your will?"

"No," answered Peabody nervously. "Why should I?"

"Oh, I was thinking that if anything happened to you to-night you might
like to say how your things are to be disposed of. You've got a gold
watch, haven't you?"

"Yes," said Peabody nervously.

"And a little money, I suppose."

"Not very much, Mr. Miles."

"No matter about that. Of course if you are killed you won't have
occasion for it," said Miles, in a matter-of-fact tone.

"I wish you wouldn't talk that way," said Peabody irritably. "It makes
me nervous."

"What's the use of being nervous? It won't do any good."

"Do you really think, Mr. Miles, there is much danger?" faltered
Peabody.

"Of course there is danger. But the post of danger is the post of honor.
Now, Peabody, I want to give you a piece of advice. If you spy one of
those red devils crouching in the grass, don't stop to parley, but up
with your revolver, and let him have it in the head. If you can't hit
him in the head, hit him where you can."

"Wouldn't it be better," suggested Peabody, in a tremulous voice, "to
wake you up, or Mr. Fletcher?"

"While you were doing it the savage would make mince-meat of you. No,
Peabody, fire at once. This would wake us all up, and if you didn't kill
the reptile we would do it for you."

"Perhaps he would see me first," suggested Peabody, in a troubled tone.

"You mustn't let him. You must have your eyes all about you. You are not
near-sighted, are you?"

"I believe I am--a little," said Peabody eagerly, thinking that this
might be esteemed a disqualification for the position he dreaded.

"Oh, well, I guess it won't make any difference, only you will need to
be more vigilant."

"I wish I was blind; just for to-night," thought Peabody to himself,
with an inward sigh. "Then they would have to excuse me."

John Miles overtook Fletcher, who was with the head wagon.

"Captain Fletcher," he said, "I am afraid Peabody will make a mighty
poor watch."

"Just my opinion."

"He is more timid than the average woman. I've got a sister at home that
has ten times his courage. If she hadn't I wouldn't own the
relationship."

"I am not willing to excuse him."

"Of course not; but I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll keep an eye open
myself, so that we sha'n't wholly depend on him."

"If you are willing to do it, Miles, we shall all be indebted to you.
Don't let him know it, though."

"I don't mean to. He shall suppose he is the only man awake in camp."

At a comparatively early hour the party stretched themselves out upon
the ground, inviting sleep. Generally they did not have to wait long.
The day's march brought with it considerable physical fatigue. Even
those who were light sleepers at home slept well on the trip across the
plains. Few or none remained awake half an hour after lying down. So
Peabody knew that he would soon be practically alone.

With a heavy heart he began to pace slowly forward and back. He came to
where Tom lay.

"Tom--Tom Nelson," he called, in a low voice.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom, in a sleepy tone.

"Are you asleep?"

"No; but I soon shall be."

"Won't you try to keep awake a little while? It won't seem so lonesome."

"Sorry I can't accommodate you, Mr. Peabody; but I'm awfully tired and
sleepy."

"Who's that talking there?" drowsily demanded the nearest emigrant.
"Can't you keep quiet, and let a fellow sleep?"

"Good night, Mr. Peabody," said Tom, by way of putting an end to the
conversation.

"Good night," returned the sentinel disconsolately.

The hours passed on, and Lawrence Peabody maintained his watch. He was
in no danger of going to sleep, feeling too timid and nervous. He began
to feel a little more comfortable. He could see nothing suspicious, and
hear nothing except the deep breathing of his sleeping comrades.

"It is not so bad as I expected," he muttered to himself.

He began to feel a little self-complacent, and to reflect that he had
underrated his own courage. He privately reflected that he was doing as
well as any of his predecessors in duty. He began to think that after he
had got back to Boston with a fortune, gained in California, he could
impress his friends with a narrative of his night-watch on the distant
prairies. But his courage had not yet been tested.

He took out his watch to see how time was passing.

It pointed to twelve o'clock.

Why there should be anything more alarming in twelve o'clock than in any
other hour I can't pretend to say, but the fact none will question. Mr.
Peabody felt a nervous thrill when his eyes rested on the dial. He
looked about him, and the darkness seemed blacker and more awe-inspiring
than ever, now that he knew it to be midnight.

"Will it ever be morning?" he groaned. "Four long hours at least before
there will be light. I don't know how I am going to stand it."

Now, there was attached to the wagon-train one of those universally
despised but useful animals, a donkey, the private property of a man
from Iowa, who expected to make it of service in California. The animal
was tethered near the camp, and was generally quiet. But to-night he was
wakeful, and managed about midnight to slip his tether, and wandered
off. Peabody did not observe his escape. His vigilance was somewhat
relaxed, and with his head down he gave way to mournful reflection.
Suddenly the donkey, who was now but a few rods distant, uplifted his
voice in a roar which the night stillness made louder than usual. It was
too much for the overwrought nerves of the sentinel. He gave a shriek of
terror, fired wildly in the air, and sank fainting to the ground. Of
course the camp was roused. Men jumped to their feet, and, rubbing their
eyes, gazed around them in bewilderment.

It was not long before the truth dawned upon them. There lay the
sentinel, insensible from fright, his discharged weapon at his feet, and
the almost equally terrified donkey was in active flight, making the air
vocal with his peculiar cries.

There was a great shout of laughter, in the midst of which Peabody
recovered consciousness.

"Where am I?" he asked, looking about him wildly, and he instinctively
felt for his scalp, which he was relieved to find still in its place.

"What's the matter?" asked the leader. "What made you fire?"

"I--I thought it was the Indians," faltered Peabody. "I thought I heard
their horrid war-whoop."

"Not very complimentary to the Indians to compare them with donkeys,"
said Miles.

Lawrence Peabody was excused from duty for the remainder of the night,
his place being taken by Miles and Tom in turn.

It was a long time before he heard the last of his ridiculous panic, but
he was not sensitive as to his reputation for courage, and he bore it,
on the whole, pretty well.




CHAPTER XXVI.

MR. PEABODY IS WORSTED.


The traveler of to-day who is whirled across the continent in six days
and a half has little conception of what the overland journey was in
the year 1850. Week after week and month after month slipped away
between the start and the arrival on the western slope of the Sierra
Nevadas. Delicate women and children of tender years developed
extraordinary endurance, and showed remarkable fortitude on the
wearisome trip. But the hope of bettering their fortunes was the magnet
that drew them steadily on, day after day, in their march across the
plains.

Tom was at an age when adventure has a charm. His feet were often weary;
but he never tired of the journey. Every morning found him active,
alert, and ready for the toilsome walk. He was, indeed, impatient for
the time to come when he could be earning something to pay up his debt
to Squire Hudson, and so relieve his father from the additional burden
assumed for his sake. Otherwise he was quite content to plod on, seeing
something new every day.

"You're always cheerful, Tom, my lad," said Ferguson, one day.

"Yes," said Tom. "I am having a good time."

"Youth is aye the time for enjoyment. When I was a lad like you I might
have been the same."

"Don't you enjoy the journey, Mr. Ferguson?" asked Tom.

"I'm getting tired of it, Tom. I look upon it as a means to an end. I'm
in a hurry to reach the mines."

"So am I, Mr. Ferguson, for that matter."

"And I can't help thinking, what if they don't turn out as well as we
expect? Then there'll be months lost, besides a good bit of money,"
replied Ferguson.

"Oh, I'm sure there is plenty of gold, and we shall get our share," said
Tom confidently; "that is, if we have our health."

"I hope it'll be as you say, my lad. Indeed, I think you are right. You
have taught me a lesson."

"Have I, Mr. Ferguson? What is it?"

"Always to look on the bright side. It is a lesson worth learning. It
makes a man feel happier, and often gives courage to press on to the
accomplishment of his purpose."

"I suppose it is natural to me," said Tom.

"It is a happy gift. It is a pity that poor creature from Boston hadn't
it."

Lawrence Peabody was approaching, and this no doubt led to the allusion.
He was limping along, looking decidedly down in the mouth, which,
indeed, was not unusual.

"What is the matter with you, Mr. Peabody?" asked Tom.

"I'm almost gone," groaned Peabody. "My strength is exhausted, and,
besides, I've got a terrible corn on my left foot."

"How long has that been?"

"For two or three days. It's torture for me to walk. I don't know but
you'll have to leave me here on the prairie to perish."

"Not so bad as that, Mr. Peabody, I hope. Perhaps Mr. Chapman will lend
you his donkey to ride upon."

The owner of the donkey was within hearing distance, and at once
expressed a willingness to lend his animal to Mr. Peabody.

"That will be better than perishing on the prairies," said Tom
cheerfully.

"I am not much used to riding," said Peabody cautiously.

"He won't run away with you, Peabody," said the owner. "He's too lazy."

Lawrence Peabody was already aware of this fact, and it gave him courage
to accept the offered help. He mounted Solomon--as the donkey was
called, for some unknown reason--and for a time enjoyed the relief from
the toil of walking. He became quite cheerful, and was disposed to
congratulate himself upon his success, when an unfortunate fit of
obstinacy came over Solomon. It dawned upon the sagacious animal that it
would be much easier to travel without a load, and, turning his head, he
looked thoughtfully at his rider.

"Get up, Solomon!" exclaimed Peabody, striking the animal on the haunch.

Solomon felt that this was taking a personal liberty and he stood
stock-still, his face expressive of obstinacy.

"Why don't he go on?" asked Peabody, perplexed.

"He's stopping to rest," said Tom. "I am afraid he is lazy."

"Go along!" exclaimed Peabody, again using his whip. But the animal did
not budge.

"This is really very provoking," murmured the rider. "What shall I do?"

"Don't give up to him," advised one of the company. "Here, let me whip
him."

"Thank you; I wish you would."

It was an unlucky speech. The other complied with the request, and
delivered his blow with such emphasis that Solomon's equanimity was
seriously disturbed. He dashed forward with what speed he could command,
Mr. Peabody holding on, in a sort of panic, till he was a hundred yards
away. Then he stopped suddenly, lowering his head, and his hapless rider
was thrown over it, landing some distance in advance. Solomon looked at
him with grim humor, if a donkey is capable of such a feeling, and,
apparently satisfied, turned and walked complacently back to the
wagon-train.

Several of the company, witnessing the accident, hurried forward to Mr.
Peabody's assistance. They picked him up, groaning and bewildered, but
not much hurt.

"None of your limbs broken," said Miles. "I guess you'll do."

"I'm badly shaken up," moaned Peabody.

"It will do you good," said Miles bluntly.

"You had better try it yourself, then," retorted Peabody, with unwonted
spirit.

"Good for you!" laughed Miles. "I suspect you are not dead yet."

"What made you put me on such a vicious beast?" asked Peabody of the
owner.

"Solomon isn't vicious; he's only lazy," said Chapman. "We can't blame
him much."

"I think he ought to be shot," said Peabody, painfully rising, and
stretching out one limb after another to make sure that none was broken.

"You seem to be unlucky, Mr. Peabody," said Tom.

"I'm always unlucky," moaned Peabody.

"Will you ride again, Mr. Peabody?" asked Chapman. "I'll catch Solomon
for you, if you like."

"Not for fifty dollars!" exclaimed Peabody energetically. "It is as much
as anybody's life is worth."

"If you will make me the same offer, I won't refuse, Mr. Chapman," said
Tom.

"You can mount him, if you like."

Tom waited for no second invitation. He approached Solomon cautiously,
vaulted upon his back, and the animal, disagreeably surprised, had
recourse to the same tactics which had proved so successful in the case
of the young man from Boston. But he had a different kind of a rider to
deal with. Tom had been accustomed to ride from the time he was six
years of age, and he stuck to his seat in spite of all attempts to
dislodge him. So far from feeling alarmed, he enjoyed the struggle.

"It's no go, Solomon!" he said gaily. "You've tackled the wrong customer
this time. Better make up your mind to go as I want you to."

Solomon came to the same conclusion after a time. He had tried his
ordinary tactics, and they had proved unavailing. The struggle had been
witnessed with some interest by the other members of the company.

"You can ride, youngster; that's a fact," said the owner of the donkey.
"I didn't say anything, but I rather expected to see you follow
Peabody."

"I'm used to riding," said Tom modestly. "Mr. Peabody is not."

"Every lad ought to know how to ride," said Ferguson. "It's a deal
manlier than smoking a cigar, to my thinking."

"I can smoke a cigar," said Peabody, desirous probably of appearing to
possess one manly accomplishment.

"You will hardly find it as useful as riding in the new country you are
going to, Mr. Peabody," said Ferguson dryly.

"I'd give something for a good cigar myself," said John Miles.

"I prefer riding," said Tom. "I never smoked a cigar in my life."

"You are just as well off without it, my lad," said the Scotchman. "It
don't do men any good, and always harms boys."

Peabody never again mounted Solomon. One trial was sufficient, and,
footsore and lame as he was, he decidedly preferred to walk.




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE LOST HORSE.


Day followed day, and every sunset found the party from eighteen to
twenty miles nearer the land of gold. They had not yet been molested by
Indians, though on more than one occasion they had encountered the
remains of those whom the savages had ruthlessly slaughtered. When they
witnessed such a spectacle they were moved less by fear than
indignation.

"I didn't think I should ever thirst for a fellow creature's blood,"
said John Miles; "but if I could meet the savages that did this bloody
work, I would shoot them down like dogs, and sleep all the more soundly
for it. How is it with you, friend Ferguson?"

"I am inclined to agree with you," said the Scotchman. "When an Indian
makes himself a beast of prey he should be treated accordingly."

"Are there any Indians in California?" asked Peabody nervously.

"I don't think we shall have any trouble with them there, Mr. Peabody,"
said Ferguson.

"Then I wish I was there now. It must be terrible to be scalped;" and
the young man from Boston shuddered.

"I don't think it would be an agreeable surgical operation," said
Fletcher, who had just come up. "Let us hope that we shall not be
called upon to undergo it."

The next morning, when breakfast was over, and the party was preparing
to start, an unpleasant discovery was made. One of the most valuable
horses was missing. He must have slipped his tether during the night,
and strayed away; as they were situated, the loss of such an animal
would be felt.

"He can't be far away," said Fletcher. "Some of us must go after him."

"Let Peabody mount the mustang, and undertake to find him," suggested
John Miles, winking at the captain.

"Mr. Peabody," said Captain Fletcher gravely, "will you undertake to
recover the horse? We shall all feel under great obligations to you."

"I--I hope you will excuse me, Captain Fletcher," stammered Peabody, in
great alarm. "I know I couldn't find the horse. I shouldn't know where
to look."

"This is where he got away. You can see his trail in the grass," said
Scott, a young man from Indiana. "All you will have to do will be to
follow the trail, Mr. Peabody."

"I'm very near-sighted," pleaded Peabody. "I should lose my way, and
never come back."

"Carrying the mustang with you? That would be a loss indeed," said John
Miles pointedly. "On the whole, Captain Fletcher, we had better excuse
Mr. Peabody."

"Mr. Peabody is excused," said the leader.

"Thank you," said Peabody, looking relieved. "I would go, I am sure, if
I could do any good; but I know I couldn't."

"Who will volunteer?" asked Fletcher.

"Let me go," said Tom eagerly.

"You are not afraid of losing your way, Tom?" said Miles.

"No; or if I do, I will find it again."

"That boy is more of a man now than Peabody will ever be," said Miles,
in a low voice to Ferguson.

"That he is," said the Scotchman, who was a firm friend of our young
hero. "There is the making of a noble man in him."

"I believe you."

"I have no objection to your going, Tom," said Fletcher; "but it is
better that you should have company. Who will go with the boy?"

"I," said several, among them John Miles and Henry Scott.

"You may go, Scott," said the leader. "I have work for Miles at camp.
The sooner you get started the better."

"All right, captain. Come along, Tom."

The two were in the saddle before two minutes had passed, and, guided by
the trail, struck out upon the prairie.

Scott was a tall, broad-shouldered young farmer, not over twenty-five,
strong and athletic, and reported, the best runner, wrestler, and
vaulter in the party. Tom was very well pleased to have his company.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

INDIAN CASUISTRY.


"I should like to know when the horse got away," said Scott, as he and
Tom rode on side by side; "then we could calculate how far we should
have to go before overtaking him."

"He wouldn't be likely to travel all the time, would he?" asked Tom.

"Probably not. He may have gone only a mile or two. Are your eyes good?"

"Pretty good."

"Look about, then, and see if you can anywhere see anything of the
rover."

Scott and Tom, drawing rein, looked searchingly in all directions; but
nowhere was the lost animal visible.

"Somebody may have found him," suggested Tom.

"That may be. If so, we have a harder job before us."

The prairie was not quite level, but was what is called a rolling
prairie, and this limited the view. Otherwise it would have been easy
for a person, whose sight was keen, to have distinguished an object as
large as a horse at a distance of many miles.

"Are you sure we are on the right track, Mr. Scott?" asked Tom.

"Yes, I can see by the trail."

"I can see no hoof-marks."

"Not just here; but look closely, and you will see slight marks of
disturbance in the grass. As long as these signs last we need have no
doubts as to our being on the right track."

"The same trail will lead us back to our party," said Tom.

"Yes, I shouldn't like to part from them in this country. It would be
rather a bad place to be lost without provisions."

They had ridden about five miles, when the trail became clearer and
better defined. In fact, the marks in the prairie grass appeared more
numerous than a single horse would be likely to make.

Scott looked grave.

"We will halt here a moment, Tom," he said. "I want to examine the
trail."

"Shall I get off my horse?"

"No; it is not necessary."

Scott dismounted and walked about, closely examining the marks in the
grass.

Finally he looked up.

"I begin to think it doubtful whether we shall recover Dan," he said.

"Why?"

"He has been found and carried off," was the reply. "Do you see the
double trail?"

"Yes," said Tom, after a brief examination.

"It means that a horseman has found Dan, and led him away. This rather
complicates matters."

"What do you think we had better do?" inquired Tom.

"That requires consideration. I could tell better if I knew by whom the
horse had been found. The finder may be honest, and would, in that case,
surrender it on our appearing, and claiming him. But, again, he may be
dishonest, and resist our claims."

"We are two to one," said Tom stoutly.

"We don't know that. The man may belong to a party."

"The members of his party would know that the horse was not his."

"Quite true, if the party was composed of decent persons, like our own;
but that is not certain."

"Then will you go back without Dan?" asked Tom.

"I don't want to do that. In fact I should be ashamed to. Captain
Fletcher would conclude that he might as well have sent Peabody; and I
am not anxious to be classed with him."

"Nor I," said Tom, smiling.

"So the only thing is to push on, and make what discoveries we may."

"All right," said Tom cheerfully.

They rode on for a couple of miles, having no difficulty in following
the trail, until they reached the brow of a small eminence. Here they
were greeted with a sight that startled them. A group of a dozen Indians
were reclining on the grass, with their horses fastened near them.
Startled as they were, they detected the animal of which they were in
search among the Indian horses.

"We've walked into a trap with our eyes open, Tom," said Scott, halting
his horse mechanically. His bronzed face was a little pale, for he knew
well the character of the savages before him, the hopelessness of
escape, and the terrible fate that probably awaited them.

"Shall we turn and fly, Mr. Scott?" asked Tom hurriedly.

"It would be of no use, Tom. We must stay and face the music."

Upon the appearance of the two friends the Indians had sprung to their
feet, and the colloquy was scarcely over before there was an Indian at
each bridle-rein. They made signs, easily understood, for Tom and Scott
to dismount.

"Stop a minute," said Scott, with creditable coolness, considering the
great peril in which he knew himself to be. "Is there any one here who
speaks English?"

An elderly Indian stepped forward quickly, and said, "Speak, white man.
I speak English a little."

"Good," said Scott; "then I want you to tell your friends here that I
came after a horse that left our camp last night. Do you understand?"

The Indian inclined his head.

"There he is," continued Scott, pointing with his finger to Dan. "Give
him to me, and I will go away."

The interpreter turned to his companions, and repeated what Scott had
said. Evidently it was not favorably received, as Scott could see by the
menacing looks that were turned upon him. He waited, with some anxiety,
for the answer to his claim. He had to wait for some minutes, during
which the Indians appeared to be consulting. It came at last.

"The white man has lied," said the Indian sententiously. "The horse is
ours."

"That's pretty cool, eh, Tom?" said Scott, provoked; not only by the
denial of his claim, but by the charge of falsehood.

Tom did not answer, thinking silence more prudent.

The Indian interpreter looked suspiciously from one to the other. He
understood what "cool" meant, but was not familiar with the special
sense in which Scott used it.

"I will prove that the horse is ours," said Scott. "Here, Dan!"

The horse whinnied, and tried to reach Scott, upon hearing his name
pronounced.

"There," said Scott triumphantly, "you see the horse knows me. I have
not lied."

The speech was an imprudent one. Indians are not lawyers, but they
understand the familiar saying, that "possession is nine points of the
law." That the horse was a valuable one they understood; and they had no
intention of parting with him. Still more, they looked with covetous
eyes at the horses ridden by Scott and the boy, and they had already
made up their minds to seize them also.

"The white man is a magician," said the interpreter. "He has bewitched
the horse. The horse is ours. He has always belonged to us."

"It's no use, Tom," said Scott. "They are bound to keep Dan, and I don't
see how we can help it. We had better give him up, and get away if we
can. All the same, the fellow is an outrageous liar."

He spoke in a low voice, and the interpreter, though listening
attentively, did not quite catch what was said.

"I guess you are right," said Tom.

Scott turned to the interpreter.

"Well, if you think it is yours, squire, I reckon you will keep it. So
we'll say good morning, and go."

He pulled the rein, but the Indian at his bridle did not let go.

"Good morning, gentlemen," said Scott. "We are going."

"White man must stay," said the Indian interpreter decisively.

"Why?" demanded Scott impatiently.

"He has tried to steal Indian's horse," said the wily savage.

"Well, by gosh; that's turning the tables with a vengeance," ejaculated
Scott. "They're rather ahead of white rogues, Tom. Will you let the boy
go?" he asked.

"White boy stay, too," answered the interpreter, after a brief reference
to the leader of the Indian party.

"Tom," said Scott rapidly, and not appearing to be excited, lest his
excitement should lead to suspicion, "none of them are mounted. Lash
your horse, and tear from the grasp of the man that holds him; then
follow me. It is our only chance."

Tom's heart beat rapidly. He knew that all his nerve was called for; but
he did not falter.

"Give the signal," he said.

"One, two, three!" said Scott rapidly. Simultaneously both lashed their
horses. The startled animals sprang forward. The grips of the Indians,
who were not suspecting any attempts at escape, were already relaxed,
and before they were fully aware of what was intended our two friends
were galloping away.




CHAPTER XXIX.

A RACE FOR LIFE.


The Indians were taken by surprise. They so outnumbered their intended
captives that they had not anticipated an attempt at escape. But they
had no intention of losing their prey. There was a howl of surprise and
disappointment; then they sprang for their horses, and, with little
delay, were on the track of our two friends.

The delay was small, but it was improved by Scott and Tom. Pressing
their animals to their highest speed they gained a lead of several
hundred feet before their savage pursuers had fairly started. It was
well that Tom was a good rider, or he might not have been able to keep
his seat. In fact, he had never ridden so rapidly before: but he felt
that he was riding for his life, and was only anxious to ride faster.
Scott had felt a little anxious on this point; but his anxiety vanished
when he saw how easily and fearlessly his boy companion kept at his
side.

"Well done, Tom!" he said, as they flew over the prairie. "Keep up this
pace, and we will escape yet."

"I can do it, if my horse holds out," returned Tom briefly.

Scott looked over his shoulder, and, brave man as he was, it almost made
him shudder. The whole party of Indians was on his track. He could see
their dusky faces, distorted by wrath, and the longing for a savage
revenge. He knew that Tom and he had little to hope for if they were
caught. Fortunately their horses were strong and fleet, and not likely
to break down.

"Ride for your life, Tom!" he shouted. "They will show us no mercy if
they catch us."

"All right, Mr. Scott!" said Tom, his face flushed, and panting with
excitement. If he had not felt that so much depended upon it; if he
could have thrust out from his mind the sense of the awful peril in
which he stood--he would have enjoyed the furious pace at which his
horse was carrying him.

The horses ridden by the Indians were not equal in speed or endurance to
those which the two friends bestrode. They were fresher indeed, but
they did not make up for the difference between them. There was one
exception, however: Dan, the stolen horse, was not only equal to either
of their horses, but had the advantage of being fresher. This, after a
while, began to tell. It was ridden by a young Indian brave, a brother
of the leader. Soon he drew away from his companions, and, yard by yard,
lessened the distance between himself and the pursued. At the end of
three miles he was close upon them, and at least fifty rods in advance
of his comrades. Scott saw this in one of his backward glances.

"Tom," said he, "the redskin on Dan is overhauling us."

"Will he catch us?"

"I mean to catch him," said Scott coolly.

Tom did not need to ask for an explanation. Scott wheeled round, took
hasty but accurate aim at the Indian, and fired. The hapless warrior
reeled in his saddle, loosed his hold of the reins, and fell to the
ground, while his horse, continuing in his course, his pace accelerated
by fright, soon galloped alongside of Scott. There was a howl of rage
from the main body of Indians, who saw the fate of their comrade,
without being able to help him.

"Now, Tom, ride as you never rode before!" shouted Scott. "We will
circumvent those Indian devils yet, and bring Dan safe into camp. Come
along, Dan, old fellow; you're doing nobly."

Dan recognized the familiar voice. He entered into the spirit of the
race, and, relieved from the weight of his rider, dashed forward with
increased speed, till he led, and Scott and Tom were forced to follow.

The Indians were mad with rage. Their comrade had received a fatal
wound. They saw the round hole in his breast, from which the life-blood
was gushing, and they thirsted for vengeance.

Should two palefaces, one of them a boy, escape from them? That would be
a disgrace, indeed; the blood of their brother called for blood in
return.

Could they have inspired their horses with the same spirit which
animated themselves, they might, perhaps, have overtaken their intended
captives; but, happily for our two friends, the horses were less
interested than their riders.

The danger was well-nigh over. It was scarcely two miles to the camp.
There they would be so re-enforced that the Indians would not venture an
attack. That was the goal they had in view. Already they could see in
the distance the wagon-train, ready for a start. They were surely safe
now. But at this unlucky moment Tom's horse stumbled. The motion was so
rapid that he could not retain his seat. He was thrown over the horse's
head, and lay stunned and insensible upon the ground. His horse kept on
his way to the camp.




CHAPTER XXX.

TOM BECOMES AN INDIAN.


Scott did not immediately notice Tom's mishap. The boy had shown himself
so good a rider that such an accident had not occurred to him as likely
to happen. When he did look back there was already a considerable
distance between them. In fact, Tom lay midway between the Indians and
himself.

What was he to do?

If he returned there was no hope of rescuing Tom; and he would
infallibly fall into the hands of the Indian pursuers. In that case his
fate was sealed. He had killed an Indian warrior, and his life would pay
the forfeit. By going on he could head a rescuing party from the camp.
His heart ached for Tom. It was hard to leave him in the hands of the
savage foe; but Tom was a boy, and there was hope that he would be
spared; so he felt that it was better to continue his flight.

There was a shout of fierce joy when the Indians saw Tom's fall. They
would have preferred to capture Scott, for he it was who had killed
their comrade; but they were glad to have one prisoner. They reined up
their horses, and halted beside the still insensible boy. They held a
brief consultation, and decided not to continue the pursuit. They could
see the encampment, which Scott was sure to reach before he could be
overtaken. They could not tell the number of the party to which he
belonged; but, being few in numbers themselves, the risk would be a
hazardous one. They decided to retire with their prisoner. Tom was
lifted to a seat in front of one of the party, and they rode leisurely
back.

This was the position in which our hero found himself when he roused
from his stupor. One glance revealed to him the whole. His heart sank
within him. They might kill him. Remembering the ghastly sights he had
seen on his trip across the plains, he thought it likely that they
would. Life was sweet to Tom. To what boy of sixteen is it not? It
seemed hard to be cut off in the threshold of an active career, and by
savage hands. But there was an additional pang in the thought that now
he would be unable to help his father. The result of his plan would only
be to impose an additional burden upon the modest home which his father
found it so hard to keep up. Tom sighed; and, for the first time in his
life, he felt discouraged.

He looked about him, scanning the dark, grave faces, and read no hope or
encouragement in any. Finally the Indians came to a halt at their old
camping-ground, and Tom was lifted from the horse. He was placed upon
the ground, in the center of the group. Then followed a consultation.
From the glances directed toward him Tom understood that he was the
subject of deliberation. In fact, his fate was being decided.

It was certainly a trying ordeal for our young hero. He was not sure of
half an hour's life. An unfavorable decision might be followed by
immediate execution. Tom felt that his best course was to remain
perfectly passive. He could not understand what was said; but we are
able to acquaint the reader with the general purport of the conference.

Several of the Indians favored immediate death.

"Our brother's blood calls for vengeance," they said. "The white boy
must die."

"The boy did not kill him," said others. "It was the white warrior who
spilled our brother's blood. He must be pursued and slain."

"What, then, shall be done with the boy? Shall he go?"

"No; we will keep him. He has strong limbs. We will adopt him into our
tribe. He will make a brave warrior."

"He shall be my brother," said the chief. "I will take him in place of
my brother who is dead."

There was a low murmur of approval. Even those who had first recommended
the infliction of death seemed to have changed their minds. They looked
at the boy as he lay stretched out upon the ground. He was stout,
comely, and strongly made. He had proved that he was an admirable rider.
If he should join them he would grow up into a warrior who would do
credit to their tribe.

So the matter was settled. The only thing that remained was to acquaint
the prisoner with the decision.

The interpreter approached Tom, and said, "White boy, you are our
captive. Why should we not kill you?"

"You can if you wish," answered Tom; "but why should you kill me? I have
done you no harm."

"Our brother is killed. He lies dead upon the plain."

"I did not kill him," said Tom.

"The white boy speaks truth. He did not kill our brother, but his white
friend took his life."

"You ought not to kill me for that," said Tom, gathering courage, for he
inferred he was to live.

"The white boy speaks truth, and therefore he shall live, but he must
join us. He must live with us, hunt with us, and fight for us."

"You want me to become an Indian!" ejaculated Tom.

"We will take you in place of the warrior that is gone," said the
interpreter.

Tom looked thoughtful. He did not enjoy the prospect before him, but it
was, at all events, better than death. While there was life there was
hope of escape. He concluded to make one appeal for freedom, and, if
that was denied, to accept the proposal.

"I have a father and mother far away," he said; "I have brothers and a
sister, who will mourn for me. My father is poor; he needs my help. Let
me go back to them."

The interpreter communicated Tom's words to his companions, but it was
easy to see that they were not favorably received. The original
advocates of the death penalty looked at our hero with hostile eyes, and
he saw that he had made a mistake.

"The white boy must become one of us; he must take our brother's place,
or he must die," said the interpreter.

Tom very sensibly concluded that it would be better to live with the
Indians than to be killed, and signified his acceptance of the offer.
Upon this the Indians formed a circle about him, and broke into a
monotonous chant, accompanied with sundry movements of the limbs, which
appeared to be their way of welcoming him into their tribe.

It seemed like a dream to Tom. He found it very hard to realize his
position, so unexpectedly had he been placed in it. He could not help
wondering what the family at home would say when they should learn that
he had joined an Indian tribe far beyond the Mississippi.




CHAPTER XXXI.

TOM GIVES A MAGICAL SOIREE.


Tom had no intention of passing his life with the Indians. In joining
them he submitted to necessity. It gave him a respite, and a chance to
devise plans of escape. He understood very well that, if he made the
attempt and failed, his life would be the forfeit. But Tom determined to
take the risk, though his life was sweet to him; but, of course, he must
wait for a favorable opportunity.

There was a chance of his being rescued by his party, but this chance
was diminished by the decision of his Indian captors to break camp, and
proceed in a northerly direction, while the course of the emigrant train
was, of course, westward. Little time was wasted. The Indians mounted
their horses, Tom being put on the horse of the fallen brave. The leader
put himself at the head, and Tom was placed in the center, surrounded by
Indians. It was evident that they were not willing to trust him yet.
They meant to afford him no chance of escape.

As the only one of the band with whom Tom could converse was the
interpreter, who rode at the head with the chief, he rode in silence.
The Indians on either side of him never turned their heads toward him,
but, grave and impassive, rode on, looking straight before them.

"This is easier than walking," thought Tom; "but I would a hundred times
rather walk with Scott, or Miles, than ride in my present company."

They rode for three hours, and then dismounted for the midday rest.

Nothing had been seen or heard of his old friends, and that made Tom
anxious and thoughtful.

"They have gone on without me, leaving me to my fate," he said to
himself, and the reflection gave him a pang. He had been on such
pleasant and friendly terms with the whole party, that this cold
desertion--as it appeared--wounded him. The young are more sensitive in
such cases than their elders. As we grow older we cease to expect too
much of those whose interests differ from our own.

Tom felt that his fate was more and more bound up with the Indians. If
some days should pass before he could escape, he would find himself in
an embarrassing condition. Suppose he got away safely, he would find
himself in a pathless plain, without provisions, and with no other guide
than the sun. If he should meet with no party, he would die of
starvation. The prospect seemed by no means bright.

I am bound to say that, for a time, Tom, in spite of his bright,
sanguine temperament, was greatly depressed; but his spirits were
elastic.

"I won't give up to despair," he said to himself. "Something tells me
that I shall come out right. I must wait and watch my chances."

Upon this his face brightened, and his air, which had been listless,
became more animated. The Indians glanced at him, with grave approval.
They concluded that he was becoming reconciled to living among them.

When the simple midday meal was placed upon the ground, and the Indians
gathered around it in a sitting posture, Tom followed their example, and
did full justice to the dinner. In fact, he had taken so much exercise
that he felt hungry. Besides, he knew that he must keep up his strength,
if he wished to escape; so, instead of keeping aloof in sullen
dissatisfaction, he displayed a "healthy appetite."

After resting several hours the Indians resumed their journey, but did
not travel far. They were in no hurry. They had no long journey to make
across the continent. They only wished to go far enough to be safe from
attack by a rescuing party of Tom's friends. Again they encamped, and
this time, from the preparations made, he understood that it was for the
night.

One thing Tom could not help noticing--the silence of these red children
of the plains. They seemed to make no conversation with each other,
except on necessary matters, and then their words were few in number,
replies being often made in a monosyllable.

"They don't seem very social," thought Tom. "I suppose they have nothing
to talk about. I wonder if the squaws ever have sewing-circles. If they
have, they can't be much like Yankee women if they don't find plenty to
talk about."

The silence became oppressive. Tom would have liked to take a walk, but
he knew that this would not be allowed. It would be thought that he
wanted to escape. Yet to sit mute hour after hour seemed to Tom
intolerably stupid. A bold idea came to him. He would try to afford them
some amusement.

Accordingly, he said to the interpreter: "Shall I show you a trick?"

The interpreter communicated the proposal to his comrades, and
permission was granted.

Tom took from his pocket a penny. He explained to the interpreter that
he would swallow the penny, and make it come out at his nose--a common
boy's trick. The Indians, to whom this also was communicated, looked
curious and incredulous, and Tom proceeded.

Now, I am not going to explain how Tom accomplished the illusion. That I
leave to the ingenuity of my boy readers to discover. It is enough to
say that he succeeded, to the great amazement of his copper-colored
spectators. There was a chorus of ughs! and Tom was requested to repeat
the trick.

He did so, the Indians being as puzzled as before.

Now, Indians are, in many respects, like children. They displayed, on
this occasion, a childish curiosity and wonder that amused Tom. They
insisted on his opening his month, to ascertain whether there was any
hidden avenue from his mouth to his nose, and found, to their surprise,
that his mouth was like their own. Then one of the Indians volunteered
to try the experiment, and nearly choked himself with the penny, which,
it must be remembered, was one of the large, old-fashioned, copper
coins, in circulation before the war. It cannot be said that he turned
black in the face, but he certainly gasped, and rolled his eyes in a
manner that alarmed his friends, and they instinctively looked to Tom
for help. Tom was equal to the emergency. He rose hastily, slapped the
Indian forcibly on the back, and the cent was ejected from his mouth.

There was another chorus of ughs! and it was evident that Tom had risen
vastly in their opinion. They looked upon him as a white magician, and
even were a little afraid that he might work them injury in some way.
But Tom's frank, good-humored manner reassured them. They asked him,
through the interpreter, if he could perform any other tricks. Tom knew
a few, that he had learned out of an old tattered book which had fallen
in his way at home; and such as he had facilities for he attempted, to
the great delight of his new friends. Tom was becoming popular; and even
those who had at first recommended death were glad that his life had
been spared.




CHAPTER XXXII.

TOM'S ESCAPE.


Night came, and the Indian camp was hushed and still. It was long before
Tom went to sleep. Generally he was a good sleeper, but his mind at
present was too active for slumber. "How long is this strange life going
to last?" he asked himself. "How long am I to be exiled from
civilization?" This was more easily asked than answered.

When he slept, his sleep was troubled. He dreamed that Lawrence Peabody
was a captive, and that the chief was about to scalp him, when suddenly
he awoke. He could not at first tell where he was, but a glance revealed
the disheartening truth.

He must have slept several hours, for the gray dawn was creeping up the
sky, heralding sunrise. He leaned on his elbow, and bent a searching
glance upon his companions. They were stretched motionless upon the
ground, hushed in the insensibility of sleep. "Are they asleep?" Tom
asked himself. He satisfied himself that the slumber was genuine, and
there sprang up in his heart the wild hope of escape. A few rods distant
the horses were fastened. Could he unfasten and mount one before any of
them a wakened?

Tom's heart beat quick with excitement. He knew that he ran a fearful
risk; but he made up his mind that now was his time.

Slowly, and without noise, he raised himself to his feet. As he stood
erect, he closely scanned the sleepers. There was not a motion. With
stealthy steps he crept to the horses. He selected the one he had ridden
the day before, and unloosed him. The animal gave a slight whinny, and
Tom's heart was in his throat. But no one stirred. He quickly mounted
the animal, and walked him for a few rods, then gave him a loose rein,
and was soon speeding away. Just then the sun rose, and this guided him
in the direction he was to take.

He had got a mile away, when, looking back through the clear air, he
saw, to his dismay, that his flight had been discovered. The Indians
were mounting their horses.

"I must gallop for life," thought Tom. "They will kill me if they catch
me."

He urged on his horse by all the means in his power. Luckily it was one
of the two fleetest horses the Indians possessed, the other being ridden
by their leader.

Tom's hope was sustained by this fact, which he had proof of the day
before.

Rather to his surprise, he did not feel as much frightened as he
anticipated. He felt excited, and this was his prominent feeling.
Probably he felt like a soldier in the heat of battle.

But the odds against Tom were terrible, and his chance of escape seemed
very slender. Behind him was a band of savages, accustomed to the
plains, strong, wily, enduring, and persistent. He was new to the
plains, and a mere boy. Moreover, he did not know where to find his
party. There were no sign-boards upon the prairies, but a vast, uniform
expanse stretching farther than the eye could reach.

Inch by inch, foot by foot, the Indians gained upon him, the leader
considerably in advance.

Even if he alone were to overtake Tom, our hero would of course be no
match for a strong, full-grown warrior, more especially as he had no
weapon with him. By some mischance he had left it in the camp.

Tom's heart began to fail him. His horse could not always, perhaps not
long, keep up his headlong speed. Then would follow capture, and a
painful death.

"It's hard," thought Tom sadly; "hard for me and for my dear parents and
brothers and sisters. Why did I ever leave home?"

He turned in the saddle, and saw the Indian leader, evidently nearer.
But he saw something else. He saw a herd of buffaloes, thousands in
number, impetuously rushing across the plain from the west. Their speed
was great. They seemed to be blindly following their leader.

"Good heavens!" ejaculated Tom, in great excitement; "the Indians are in
their path. If the herd does not stop, they will be destroyed."

The Indians were fully aware of their great danger. They knew the plains
well, and the terrible, resistless power of these wild herds when once
on the march. They no longer thought of Tom, but of their own safety.
But the buffaloes were close at hand. They were sweeping on like a
whirlwind. The Indians could only ride on, and trust to clear them. But
their pathway was wide. It reached to within a furlong of where Tom was
riding. They never paused; some of the animals in the advance might have
veered to the right or left on seeing the Indians, but the pressure from
behind prevented. The savages saw their fate, and it inspired them with
more dread than an encounter with white foes. Finally, they halted in
despair, and their fate overtook them. Riders and steeds were overthrown
as by a flash of lightning. The dark, shaggy herd did not stop, but
dashed on. Tom, in awe and excitement, halted his horse, and watched the
terrible sight. He could not but sympathize with his late companions,
though he knew they would have taken his life.

The buffaloes passed on, but left no life behind them. The Indians and
their horses were all trampled to death. Tom was alone upon the plains.

He thanked God in his heart for his self-deliverance; though he
shuddered at the manner in which it was wrought. He, too, had been near
being overwhelmed, but, through God's mercy, had escaped.

But for what had he escaped? Unless he found his own party, or some
other, he would starve to death, or might fall into the power of some
other tribe of Indians. He must ride on.

An hour later he thought he saw in the distance a solitary horseman. It
might be an Indian; but that was not likely, for they generally traveled
in numbers. It was more likely to be a white man. Any white man would be
a friend, and could guide him to safety, unless he were himself lost. At
any rate, there seemed but one course to follow, and that to ride toward
the stranger.

When Tom drew near his heart was filled with sudden joy, for, in the new
arrival, he recognized John Miles. Miles was no less delighted.

"Tom, old boy," he said, "is it you? How did you get away? I was afraid
we should never see you again."

"I feared so myself," said Tom; "but I have been saved in a wonderful
manner. Has the train moved on?"

"Do you think we would go on without you? Not a man was willing to stir
till you were found. Even Peabody, though afraid of falling into the
hands of the Indians, and losing his scalp, was in favor of our waiting.
The boys are very anxious about you."

Tom heard this with satisfaction. The esteem of our friends and
associates is dear to us all; and it is always sad to think that we may
be forgotten in absence.

"But you have not told me of your escape, Tom," said Miles. "Where are
the Indians who captured you?"

"All dead!" answered Tom solemnly.

"Good heavens! You don't mean to say----"

"That I killed them? Oh, no! Look over there! Can you see anything?"

Miles looked earnestly.

"I think I see upon the ground some men and horses."

"It is the Indians. They were pursuing me when they were trampled to
death by a herd of buffaloes."

"Wonderful!" ejaculated Miles. "I have heard of such things, but hardly
believed in them."

"It was a terrible sight," said Tom soberly. "I wish I could have been
saved in some other way."

"It was you or they," said Miles sententiously. "It is well as it is."

       *       *       *       *       *

They were warmly welcomed at the camp. Tom was looked upon as one raised
from the dead; and the particulars of his wonderful escape were called
for again and again.

"You are sure they didn't scalp you, Tom?" asked Mr. Peabody.

"Feel and see, Mr. Peabody," said Tom, smiling. "I believe my hair is
pretty firm."

"I wouldn't have been in your shoes for all the gold in California,"
said Peabody fervently.

"I believe you, Mr. Peabody. Indeed, I think I may say that I wouldn't
be placed in the same situation again for all the gold in the world."

"Tom," said Scott, "you are bound to succeed."

"What makes you think so?"

"You have shown so much pluck and coolness that you are sure to get
along."

"I hope so, I am sure, for my father's sake."

       *       *       *       *       *

Some weeks later a wagon-train was seen slowly climbing a mountain pass
on the crest of the Sierra Nevada Mountains. They reached the summit,
and, looking eagerly to the westward, saw the land of gold at their
feet. They had been months in reaching it. Now it lay spread before
them, glorious in the sunlight.

"Yonder lies the promised land, my lad," said Ferguson. "It remains to
be seen whether we shall be rewarded for our long and toilsome journey."

"If hard work will win success, I mean to succeed," said Tom stoutly.

"I don't see any gold," said Lawrence Peabody, with a disappointed air.

"Did you think it grew on trees, Mr. Peabody?" asked Scott
sarcastically.

"I should like to stop a week at a first-class hotel before getting to
work," remarked Peabody. "I don't like roughing it."

"We will leave you at the first hotel of that sort we meet. Now, boys,
gather about me, and give three rousing cheers for California."

Thus spoke Miles, and swung his hat. The cheers were given with a will,
and the wagon-train commenced the descent.


THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

The original text did not include a table of contents. One was added to
assist the reader.

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 61, word "don't" added to text. (I don't doubt)

Page 66, "dosen't" changed to "doesn't" (it doesn't look to)

Page 105, a repeated sentence was removed. ("I'm out of luck, and out of
cash, Vincent.")

Page 207, "twelev" changed to "twelve" (pointed to twelve)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Young Adventurer, by Horatio Alger

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNG ADVENTURER ***

***** This file should be named 27300.txt or 27300.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/3/0/27300/

Produced by Fox in the Stars, Brenda Lewis, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
