The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Romantic Analogue, by W.W. Skupeldyckle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Romantic Analogue

Author: W.W. Skupeldyckle

Illustrator: Ed Emsh

Release Date: April 26, 2010 [EBook #32143]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANTIC ANALOGUE ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction September
    1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                                 THE

                          Romantic Analogue


                        By W. W. Skupeldyckle


                        Illustrated by Ed Emsh


     _Norm Venner's fancy was pretty well fixed on thoughts of
      electronic calculators--until the invention started making
      passes at the inventor!_

       *       *       *       *       *




Mathematicians are just like people: old, young, fat, thin, male,
female. This one was male, thirty-five, with steady brown eyes and a
nice smile when he remembered to use it. His name was Norman Venner,
and besides being a mathematical whiz generally, he had designed and
built an electronic brain, or calculator, which was in some ways
smarter than himself--and a lot less diffident.

Electronic calculators are invariably given acronymic names such as
BINAC, SEAC, and MANIAC, and nine out of ten of them are of the
digital type. This is a nice way of saying that they count on their
fingers. They're nearly as big as yachts, and cost more, but can
calculate a million times faster than any human.

Norm's machine was of the analogue type, which is less flexible, less
complex, and vastly smaller and cheaper. He called it the ICWEA
(ICK-wee-ah), which stood for "I Can Work 'Em All!" It could, too! It
was especially good at deriving equations from curves, which was
really something.

Charley Oglethorpe burst into the office one morning, catching Norm in
a brown study. "Hi, Genius. How is she perking now?"

"All right, except the pen skips a little sometimes and makes a messy
curve."

"Have to damp that arm better. When can I have her to work on?"

"Soon as I finish these Mugu problems."

Charley stared at him.

"Mugu. Guided-missile center. It's nice business if we can get it--the
digitals are all booked up months ahead, and the particular type of
problem they send us is right up our alley."

[Illustration]

"I thought you were kidding me, like that Boolean Algebra stuff."

"Wasn't kidding then, either."

"I'll stick to instrument-making, thanks. You math guys never have any
fun."

Norm shrugged, turned to the telephone, and called an extension.

"Hermosa." It was a rich, pleasant voice.

"Vic? How about the rest of the Mugu cards? Ready yet?"

"I'll send them up right away. Just finished them."

"Who was that?" Charley inquired.

"Vic Hermosa. Smart boy."

Charley smiled a little.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a knock at the door.

"Come in," Norm called. The door opened, and a small, neat girl
entered. Her long bob was dark and silky, but windblown. She tossed
her head and her hair settled into place, as if she had just brushed
it. She extended a pack of punched cards.

"Thank you," Norm said, gravely.

The girl looked up at him suddenly, and he stepped back a little. She
had surprising, deep-violet eyes, and their glance seemed to have a
tangible impact. She nodded grave acknowledgment and left.

"Damn it, I wish I could do that!" Norm complained.

"Make goo-goo eyes?"

"No. Shake my head so my hair would automatically be combed like hers.
I've been fighting this cowlick ever since I've been a kid--stocking
caps, gunk, the works. Still got it. And the part moves around and I
have to hunt for it."

"Know who she is?"

"Nope. Clerk, messenger, I guess. They're always hiring new ones."

"Doesn't she ever speak?"

"Of course she--come to think of it, I've never heard her. Must say
it's a relief after the usual yackety-yack. Haven't anything to talk
to her about, anyway. She's just a child."

"A pretty one, though."

"Yes, she is."

"You sure don't know anything about women. If anyone made eyes at me
that way, I'd do something about it."

"What, for instance?" Norm inquired dryly.

"Well, of course, I'm married. But I'd find out who she was, anyhow.
Sometimes I think you're dead and don't know it."

"Sometimes I agree with you," Norm said. He fed one of the punch cards
into the transmitter head, which fingered the holes and told ICWEA
what the problem was. ICWEA began drawing a curve on the curve tracer.
It would have taken Norm or anyone else days to arrive at the answer.
"See? Skips here and there, but I can ink in the gaps."

"Looks like the pen catches on the paper a little. I'll grind the
point while I'm at it. Say, that thing really thinks, doesn't it?"

"In a way. Generally, the digitals have it all over the analogues when
it comes to reasoning, but I built an extra brain into her."

"Where?"

"The 'Y' path. Remember? Tries several appropriate methods in
succession. I analyzed my own methods of attack, and built the same
methods into her. She's an electronic _me_, except faster and more
accurate."

"I bet. She's more alive than you are. Why don't you step out a
little? First thing you know, you'll be getting old, and it'll be too
late."

"Leave the match-making to the women. I may be old, but I'm not an old
fool. It's fall, not spring."

"Yeah? All you need to be an old fool is just a little more time."

       *       *       *       *       *

Norm ignored him, and took a card from his desk. It seemed to be an
extra, not with the pack. He put it in the machine. The curve-tracer
began to draw a rather abrupt curve, which meandered half across the
sheet before Norm realized what it was. Suddenly, an image leaped to
his mind's eye and he watched with fascination while the pen traced
this mathematical impossibility to the far end of the paper, and in
obedience to several successive negative factors in the problem
retraced in the opposite direction a little lower down.

A head, a slightly lifted elbow, full rounded breast, a knee
luxuriously drawn up, a dangling arm, all in one continuous line.
There was nothing obvious about it; it was formalized, but with the
individual style that is the artist's signature. Once seen, the image
persisted.

"Hey, Charley, look at this!"

"Yeah. What about it?"

"What about it! You ever see anything like it?"

"Sure. It's a closed loop, like a hysteresis curve."

"_An_ hysteresis curve. But this isn't one. Look closely."

"Of course, it has harmonics and variables in it. Might be one of
those gas-discharge curves, if the gas tube happened to be defective.
I've seen some funny...."

"Look! It's a reclining figure, with the head turned toward
you--see?--and the forearm over the head--_here_. Breast, knee here,
foot with the toe pointed, calf, thigh, and the near arm hanging.
Remarkable, once you see it...."

"You're crazy. All I can see is a closed loop with some wrinkles in
it."

"Why, it's nearly as plain as a photograph! I can't understand...."

"Plain, my eye! If that's the arm hanging down, and this the hand,
where are the fingers? That 'hand' is just an oval. You got some
imagination if you can get a reclining figure out of that."

"Not a nude of the beer-garden type, I grant you. This is real art.
Know what this means? Have you any idea how complex a formula must be
to trace a curve like this? Just a plain hyperbola is bad enough. This
is a test of the machine. Those Mugu boys have worked out this formula
to see if she could break it down and draw the equivalent curve,
though I don't see how they did it. Even the larger digitals would
find this a tough nut to crack, but our baby is a whiz at curves, see?
I wonder how they justified the machine-time on it. Of course it is
barely possible that they derived the equation themselves, but it
must have taken weeks if they did."

"Maybe it took us long as you say, but I still can't see any reclining
figure in that curve. It's just a closed curve with some wiggles and
bumps on it."

"In any case, I'm going to send this to Mugu right away. They'll want
to know how long it took."

"I wouldn't, if I were you."

"Why not?"

"Maybe trouble developed in the machine. Better run some more cards
through it first. But right now I'm going home. We're having a roast
tonight. Say, why don't you come to supper with us? Alice would be
delighted--she was just wondering what happened to you. I'll phone
her...."

"No, no! I have to--look, I got to find out what this means, you see?
It isn't that--explain it to Alice, will you? We need this contract,
need all the work we can get, you understand?"

"Sure, sure. How about next week? OK? Well, see you in the morning."
Charley left, grinning to himself as he closed the door behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Norm didn't see the grin. He was already puzzled enough; ICWEA behaved
herself perfectly on the next five cards, and kept her mind on her
business. Meanwhile, Norm studied the first curve again. Funny Charley
couldn't see it--the figure was puzzling at first, until you got the
idea, but then it was so clear. Or was it?

Suddenly, he couldn't see it himself. He turned it upside down and
sideways; it was just a funny closed curve, having neither
mathematical nor structural significance. Maybe he was going crazy!

He threw the curve down on his desk and, soothed by the whirring of
the tracer motor, fell into a brown study. Suddenly, the image of the
brunette with the violet eyes appeared. No reclining nude, she; she
shook her head in that habitual gesture and her long bob fell
perfectly in place. She turned, with demurely downcast lashes and
looked up at him with her violet eyes, and Norm came out of his trance
with a start.

He removed the last curve--a simple hyperbolic curve, probably a
problem in attenuation or decay of some kind--and put in the last
punch-card. The machine started up immediately; the curve was
elliptical. Then a vertical down-stroke, retraced and with a gentle
half-loop added. It was writing! P-r-o-p-i-n-q.... What might this be?
He watched, fascinated, as the letters continued. "Propinquity is the
mother of love," it said, and stopped.

His trained mathematical logic gave him an immediate solution to the
enigma: he was cracking up. It was utterly impossible to derive the
equation to write "propinquity" in Spencerian script in less than a
hundred man-hours, nor could a mathematical calculator be hired for so
frivolous a purpose. It was fantastic, impossible; therefore, it was
not so, and he was either dreaming or crazy. Maybe thinking about that
little brunette.... Surely not; still, he had been driving himself
pretty hard. In the morning he would be fresh and alert. If it were a
trick, he'd catch the trickster. And if it turned out to be a
perfectly logical curve, he'd see a doctor.

He left the curve in the machine, closed the ventilator in the wall
over his desk, and turned on the burglar alarm. This was nothing so
crude as a loose board with a switch, but a quite elaborate electronic
circuit that produced a field near the door. It wouldn't work on
ghosts, but if any material body entered that field, it would trip the
alarm and start a regular Mardi Gras. Security required by government
contracts hardly demanded so much, but for a small plant it was
sufficiently cheap, and Charley had had a lot of fun with it. Charley!
Have to keep him out, too; and being its daddy, he'd know how to
disable the alarm. Of course, it would really be sufficient to tie a
thread across the door which would break if anyone entered. He had no
thread, but after a moment's thought, he pulled a three-cent stamp out
of his bill-fold, and turned out the office-light. After glancing up
and down the hall, he stuck the stamp on the door so that it would
tear if the door opened.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the morning, the stamp was still intact, and it was hard to see,
even in broad daylight. The paper in the curve-tracer was perfectly
blank, and there was no punch-card in the transmitter head. It might
still be an elaborate joke, but the chances were small. He might be
cracking up, or may have imagined the whole thing. The best thing to
do would be to put it entirely out of his mind.

He succeeded in this until mid-morning, when ICWEA called him a
"handsome devil." He jerked the punch-card out of the transmitter and
called Vic.

"Hermosa."

That voice! It made chills run up and down his backbone. A man had no
right to a voice like that. "Vic? Bring up the calculations for the
last batch of punch-cards, will you? I want to check something. The
card numbers are F-141 through F-152."

"Right away."

Vic wasn't especially gabby. A good-looking young Latin, who knew as
much math as most, they'd probably lose him to the draft any day now.
Presently, someone knocked on the door.

"Come in."

It wasn't Vic; it was the girl. She laid the pack of problems and
their attached work-sheets on the desk, shook her hair into place--did
she even have to comb it in the morning when she got up?--looked him
briefly in the eye, and turned to go.

"How is Vic these days?" Norm inquired, whimsically. "Is he able to
get about?"

The girl smiled politely at this obvious badinage and left.

He checked the problems against cards as he came to them. He knew the
punch code well enough to do this in his head, since the kind of
operation indicated was quite obvious. But the problems ended with
F-151, and the "handsome devil" card was F-152. He got on the phone
again.

"Vic? What's your next card number?"

"F-153." One expected a little guy to have a high voice; this one was
quite deep, but soft.

"Are the cards numbered very far ahead?"

"We usually number a couple of dozen cards, and assign the numbers to
the problems as they come in, from a scratch sheet."

"Any of the cards been lost?"

"Oh yes, on occasion. So far, we've recovered them all--there are only
two rooms where they could be. Up there or down here."

_That voice!_ How could a man have a voice like that? And why should
he care if one did? Why even notice it? Instead of going to the
cafeteria for lunch, he drove downtown and consulted the family
doctor, who laughed at him. Reassured, he returned to the plant and
got a sandwich and milk before going to his office. Old Doc
Heffelbauer might be wrong, but he usually wasn't. Norm liked several
men, but he didn't dream about any of them; if he was off his rocker,
it was in some other manner. Visual delusions, for instance.

The thing to do was to see Vic face to face. He called the office
manager. "Henry? Send Vic Hermosa up there, will you? I want to talk
to him."

"Vic Hermosa? He's in the Army. Didn't you know?"

"No, I didn't. Who is the guy that answers the phone in that fruity
voice?"

Henry lowered his voice. "Guy? That's Vic's sister Virginia. She took
Vic's place when he left. Simplified the security investigation, and
she's good, too. About as good as Vic, I'd say."

"You mean to tell me a little girl like her could have a voice that
deep?"

"Startling, isn't it? Of course, it's actually a low contralto or
tenor, but you expect her to be a lyric soprano. Shall I send her up
to see you?"

"No, no. I want to think a bit first. Say, who interviewed her?"

"Charley, I suppose. Just a formality, anyhow; the Hermosas and the
Oglethorpes are neighbors, you know."

       *       *       *       *       *

Wonderful stuff! Esoteric phenomena in a sealed office! His very own
calculating machine made calculated love to him; his best friend was
evasive, and the junior mathematician he thought he had been talking
to every day for a couple of weeks was in the army. He might hammer
away at all concerned until all the cards were accounted for, but that
would disrupt office routine. Strategy, that was the thing! Be mighty
peculiar if he couldn't break up this business, now that he had an
idea what was going on.

But did he? Whoever punched the cards needed the proper equations
derived first, and that called for a digital or an analogue computer.
Preferably his own ICWEA, because she was especially good at curves.
Deriving them by the old methods was just too much horse-work for any
joke. And it didn't have to be a joke, either. The joke might be just
the cover for a more sinister activity--_bosh!_ If that were the
case, why call attention to it with funny-business?

But what hurt was the girl's being mixed up in it. He could take a rib
from Charley, for instance, but the girl was practically a
stranger--unfortunately. Women could be cruel, as his mother had often
warned him. He thought of his mother's last year in the hospital and
winced. She had sacrificed so much for him; and yet, was it really
better to be a free bachelor than an old family man like Charley?
There wasn't anything the matter with Alice that he could see. Charley
loved her; that was plain.

Tonight should solve the thing, once and for all. He left the plant,
speaking to everyone he met as he usually did. Then he sneaked back
in, with the guard's help, and hid in his own office with the lights
out.

His phone rang and he almost answered it before he remembered that he
was supposed to be gone. The building was by no means deserted;
probably there was someone working overtime in more than one
department, though the main business for the day was finished. After a
bit, the phone rang again, and he ignored it.

Waiting was hard. He couldn't read, so he let his mind wander: the
next modification to ICWEA--what a romantic old thing she was! He
needed a haircut: he'd have to get one tomorrow, before the hair grew
down over his ears. What a voice that girl had--and those eyes! Would
they get further work from Mugu? How could they contact other
Government agencies? ICWEA was working out pretty good; would it be
better to try to sell ICWEAs to anyone who wanted them, or to keep the
old girl busy and work problems for others? Eventually, the former,
though for the time being it might be better to continue as they were
until the old girl was well known. Under present conditions, that
shouldn't take--what was that hissing noise, a radiator?

He listened closely. Hiss, hiss, hiss. No, it was a rubbing sound,
with a scrape and an occasional hollow thump. Not loud, but close at
hand. The ventilating system--how obvious, now! He watched a white
hand disengage the catches and carefully lower the grill to his desk.
A small figure in white cover-alls wormed its way out of the opening,
landed on its hands on top of his desk, kicked feet clear and
cartwheeled to the floor with disdainful ease. A head-shake settled a
long bob in place; who could do that? Virginia Hermosa, and no one
else!

She couldn't see him against the shine of the window. She turned ICWEA
on and let her warm up, meanwhile fastening a large sheet of paper on
the bed of the curve-tracer with tape. She put a blank card in the
punching head, opened the door of the patching-panel cabinet and
rearranged the patch-cords there.

What a lab assistant she would make! Wasted in Set-up; anyone could
punch cards, with a little practice. Well, not anyone, but any
mathematician could. How thoroughly she knew this machine! Charley
must have told her, or her brother, plenty!

With the curve-tracer running at slow speed, she held the stylus
steadily on the words she had written on the paper; the coordinates
and rates were fed into ICWEA's brain, she derived the horrible
equations corresponding to the script, and obligingly translated these
in turn to punchings on the card.

So simple, when you saw it. But who would think of putting a burglar
alarm on an air-duct? She could go all over the building through the
walls if she chose. She was small enough to get through the ducts
easily, though the vertical sections must be tough, even for so
athletic a girl.

The punching head stopped. Virginia restored everything to its
original condition, stuck the card she had punched into a pile of
them, folded the paper and stuffed it into her pocket, and turned to
go. Norm put on the lights.

       *       *       *       *       *

Startled, she whirled, churning the air with her hands to keep her
balance. He held his hand out for the paper.

"No!" she said, her voice shrill with excitement.

Wordlessly, he closed in on her, and after a brief struggle pulled the
paper out of her pocket.

It said, simply, "I love you." Norm looked at Virginia, who turned her
head away.

"I can't appreciate the joke just now, though I realize it must be
very funny. Charley will enjoy it. But what a lot of trouble. Suppose
you had got stuck in the duct, then what? Is it worth the risk? And
the violation of security is very serious."

"I'm going to quit anyway," she muttered.

So deep a voice for such a small girl! "Why did you do it?"

"Well, it all started as a joke. Charley said you were shy,
and--and--well...."

"I see. Natural enough, I suppose. And you pretended to be your
brother on the phone."

"No, I never said I was Vic," she denied, quickly.

He was handling this all wrong; he wasn't getting anywhere. All this
was just talk, evasive talk. "Charley hired you?"

"Yes. When Vic left for basic training."

"I see. Charley's quite a joker, and it was hard to refuse him."

"It was kind of a joke at first, but you're overlooking something:
he's very fond of you. He really is! He brags all the time about how
smart you are, and what a nice guy."

"Charley's married, and he wants to see me married, too."

"And you don't like girls?"

"Listen, you made that drawing, too, and all the other stuff?"

"Yes."

An idea raised its pretty head. "Listen, I've decided to be very angry
about this. You've made a fool of me, and I'm not going to let you get
away with it. Now, I know a place that's quiet, and has very good
steaks; I'm going to take you to supper and bawl you out. Better get
into street-clothes, and don't take all night."

"Sorry, I couldn't possibly. Some other time, perhaps."

"Tonight. Now. Get going."

"No. I have a date."

"Break it!"

"No! You may be my boss, and I may be a forward hussy, but tonight I'm
going home, and you can't stop me!"

How silly could you get? Suddenly he understood the way of a man with
a maid; love was older than conversation, and they both saw and
understood through and beyond any silly words. In fact, the sillier
the words, the better!

"That's what you think! You're going with me, or you're going to jail.
They'll put you in a dark cell with the rats. They have their own
specially-bred rats, you know." He leered, slyly.

"You wouldn't dare!"

He shrugged, elaborately, and turned to the phone. She darted past him
to the door and he caught her, pulled her back out of the hall. She
was surprisingly strong and determined, and she ducked when he kissed
her.

"That one was a mess, wasn't it?" he complained.

She relaxed and began to laugh, and he joined her. She looked into his
eyes a long moment, and pulled his head down, kissed him tenderly.
"You don't give a girl much choice--one big rat or a lot of little
ones."

"I'll give you no choice at all. I'll teach you to play tricks on me!
Hurry up and change."

"One of the girls keeps a semi-formal in her locker. I can borrow it
and we could go dancing."

"I don't dance. Never learned. Couldn't we just talk?"

"We could, but we won't; you'll never learn any younger. You seem
light enough on your feet. Come on, it'll be fun!"

"Tonight I can do anything! You take too long to change, and I'll tear
the building down brick by brick with my bare hands, hear me?"

"No, please don't! I'll hurry, I promise!"

He waited impatiently at the door of the locker room. Now that he knew
how to talk to a girl, he wanted to talk, and talk, and talk some
more. He planned extravagant things to say when she came out, but when
she appeared, smiling, he was struck dumb. She took his arm and they
half ran, half skipped out of the building to his car.

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *







End of Project Gutenberg's The Romantic Analogue, by W.W. Skupeldyckle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANTIC ANALOGUE ***

***** This file should be named 32143.txt or 32143.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/1/4/32143/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
