Project Gutenberg's The Worlds of Joe Shannon, by Frank M. Robinson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Worlds of Joe Shannon

Author: Frank M. Robinson

Illustrator: Paul Orban

Release Date: June 4, 2010 [EBook #32680]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORLDS OF JOE SHANNON ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science Fiction March
    1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
    U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.





    _Strumming a harp while floating on a white cloud might be Paradise
    for some people, but it would bore others stiff. Given an unlimited
    chance to choose your ideal world, what would you specify--palaces
    or log cabins?_


                 THE WORLDS
                 of Joe Shannon

                 By Frank M. Robinson

                 Illustrated by Paul Orban


I'll take beer, son, and thanks again for the offer. As you can see,
I'm kinda down on my luck. I know what you're thinking, but I'm not
really on the bum. I usually make out all right--nothing fancy, mind
you, but it's a living. Odd jobs in the winter and spring, follow the
harvests in the summer and fall. Things are slack right now.

You? Electronics, huh? Used to know a fellow in electronics....

His name was Joe Shannon, used to work for Stellar Electric up in
Fremont. Young fellow, not more'n twenty-five or so. Rail thin, wispy
hair, serious look--you know, the one suit, absent-minded type. Joe
was a brain. A triple-A, gold-plated, genuine genius. Had a wife named
Marge. Not beautiful but pretty and a nice figure and a cook you never
saw the likes of. Like I say, she was married to Joe but Joe was
married to his work and after you'd been around a while, you could
tell there was friction.

But that ain't the beginning.

I suppose I'm partly responsible because it started when I was over
for dinner one night. I had been working in the garden and doing odd
jobs around the house that afternoon and I finagled it so I was
invited for supper. Marge Shannon made chili that I just couldn't stay
away from. Thick with beans and meat and easy on the spices so it
wouldn't burn an old man's stomach.

[Illustration]

Joe and I had just gone into the living room--Marge stayed in the
kitchen to do the dishes--and I was feeling stuffed and kinda sleepy.
All of a sudden Joe says out of a clear blue sky: "Harry, this is a
hell of a world we live in, isn't it?"

Now Joe had never struck me as being the unhappy type. He loved his
work, he loved his wife (and just about in that order), and so far as
I knew he didn't owe any money. So I tried to feel him out, to find
out where the rub was.

"There's nothing wrong with the world, Joe," I says. "It's just the
people in it."

He started methodically filling his pipe and tamping down the tobacco
and not saying a word and I get the feeling that he's deadly serious
about something.

"You're right," he says quietly. "It isn't the world, it's the
people."

I sit there feeling puzzled but a lot less sleepy and finally I ask:
"Anything wrong, Joe?"

He lights his pipe and settles back in the big, overstuffed easy chair
with the flowered slip-cover that Marge made, still frowning. "It's an
unhappy world," he repeats.

"It all depends on what side of the picture you want to look at," I
says, trying to cheer him up. "Maybe you been reading too many
newspaper headlines."

Joe wasn't listening. "What makes people unhappy, Harry?"

Now, son, there's a million things that make people unhappy. Given
half the night, I could maybe list a couple of hundred. But to narrow
it down to one or two, I couldn't do it. So I just shook my head and
let Joe carry the ball.

"It's a complex world, Harry. A lot of people never adjust to it. Some
of them turn the tables and try to adjust the world to them, which
makes a lot of other people unhappy. No, I'd say there's a certain
number of people who just don't fit in this world of ours. Maybe at a
different time and on another world, they might fit. But they don't
fit on this one, not right here and now."

       *       *       *       *       *

That was a way of looking at it that I had never thought of before.
And Joe had a point. Now you take old Barney Muhlenberg, the town
drunk. I knew Barney when he was a boy, and a more sober,
adventure-seeking young rascal you never saw. But by then all the
frontiers had dried up, it was between wars, and the only adventure
Barney could find was in the bottom of a bottle. Barney was one of
those poor folks born fifty years too late.

Or you take Miss Alice Markey, the history teacher at Fremont High.
She's an old spinster--frail, white-haired, and a little bit crabby
now. You'd never believe it but she used to be the romantic type.
Somehow, the right man just never came along, but she's never given up
hoping either.

Sure, you wouldn't believe it to look at them. But that's how people
are, down underneath. All dreams and wishful thinking.

"It's tough, Joe," I says, "but what can you do about it?"

It always seemed to me that you weren't going to help people by
letting them fall asleep on a couch at fifty dollars a nap and trying
to convince them they should give up their dreams.

"You've got to give people something _positive_!" Joe says, hitting an
end table with his fist so an ashtray jumps off.

I sat up and began to take notice. Once Joe had an idea, he usually
did something about it.

"You got something in mind," I accused.

He stopped pacing and pointed his pipe at me like it was the working
end of a twenty-two rifle. "I got an idea, Harry," he says, the genius
showing in his eyes like the dollar signs in a cash register. "I'm
going to make a machine during my vacation and...."

And then Marge is in the doorway, dishtowel in her hand and little
anger spots in her cheeks. "Joseph Shannon!" she says, stamping her
foot. "You know perfectly well what we're going to do and where we're
going to go on your vacation!"

Joe's mouth got set and I could see a storm blowing up so I struggled
to my feet and got my hat. "That was awful nice chili, Missus
Shannon," I says, and it isn't much more than two seconds later when
I'm out the front door and walking up the sidewalk.

       *       *       *       *       *

Well, Joe--stubborn Irishman that he was--stayed right in town during
his vacation. He had a laboratory in the basement and every day when I
went by I could hear him and Wally Claus, his assistant, working down
there, hammering and nailing and running electric motors that spat
sparks and whined worse'n two alley cats fightin' in a fish market.

On the day that it's finished, Joe invites me over for dinner again.
After the meal's over--and Joe's so anxious that he don't even tell
Marge how nice the tuna fish casserole was--we go down into the
basement. Marge doesn't come along.

"What's the matter with Marge?" I ask. "Ain't she interested?"

Joe jams his hands in his pockets, scowls, and says: "We've been
having a little trouble, Harry. She doesn't see things my way."

It isn't any of my business so I clam up and walk over to where the
whole front half of the basement is curtained off with a couple of old
sheets and a drawstring.

"This is it," Joe says proudly, pulling on the drawstring. "The
greatest invention since the wheel!"

Well, to tell you the truth, son, I was kinda disappointed. I had
expected something big and shiny but what there was looked a little
like a cross between a phone booth and one of those things in train
stations where you take your own photograph. I looked inside and all I
could see was a big screen in front, like on a television set, a coin
slot, and a funny looking hat with a cable leading out of it.

"It's real nice," I says, not actually knowing whether it was or not.
"What is it?"

"I call it a _Paradise_ booth," Joe says.

I took another look at the machine, and then looked at Joe. It occurs
to me that maybe he's been working too hard or that arguments with
Marge have sorta unsettled him.

"Look, Harry," Joe says, "remember when we were talking about all the
people who didn't fit in this world?"

"Sure I remember," I says. "What's this got to do with it?"

"What if people could choose the type of world they wanted to live
in?"

I looks at him blankly. "I don't get it."

He fishes around for his pipe and lights up. "How big's the universe,
Harry?"

"Now son, I got no idea how big the universe is and I says so. All I
know is that it's _big_."

"Most scientists say the universe is infinite," Joe explains. "And if
it's infinite, then it must have an infinite number of worlds in it.
An actual world to match whatever kind of world you can dream up,
let's say. All you have to do is step into the _Paradise_ booth, put
on the cap, visualize the kind of world you want to live in so it
shows on the screen, and off you go!"

"You're kidding," I says feebly. "You don't really mean it."

He taps me on the chest with his finger and says: "Yes, I do really
mean it, Harry. I've tried it and it works!"

And there I thought I had him. "If you went off to another world," I
says slyly, "just how did you get back?"

"Built myself another machine," he says promptly.

I snapped the trap shut. "Just picked this world out of all the
millions there are? Just like that."

Joe grinned. "I just thought of the damnedest world that I could, and
here I was!"

Well, he had me. There wasn't much more I could say. Joe's idea, of
course, was to build machines and put them on the street corners like
you would newspaper stands. He figured that all the misfits and the
unhappy people would sneak out and use them and _whisht_, off they'd
fly to their own favorite world, leaving all us well-adjusted people
behind. He even had a slogan figured out. "_Paradise--for only a
quarter!_"

You see, he figured he'd have to charge a quarter not only to pay for
the machines but because people are just naturally suspicious of
anything they get for free....

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe and Wally Claus rigged up three of the machines and installed them
on some of the better known street corners around Fremont. Joe had
trouble getting a license to do it, but when he told the city fathers
what the machines did, they figured the best way to discourage a
crackpot was to let him go ahead and flop on his own.

And he came close to doing it. Those booths just sat on the street
corners all summer and gathered dust. People called them Shannon's
folly, which didn't help things with Marge any.

And then one day, Barney Muhlenberg disappeared. We thought he might
have gotten drunk and fallen in the river and we spent a good two days
dragging it. And then we looked in at his rooming house but we didn't
find a thing except thirty-nine empty bottles and a rusty opener.

It was Joe who first discovered what had happened. He got hold of me
and we went down to the _Paradise_ booth on the corner just opposite
from Schultz's Bar and Grill. There was a quarter in the coin till and
when I looked at the screen, I knew Barney had taken off.

Well, everybody's happy. Joe's glad that his machine has finally
caught on, Barney is probably happy playing Cowboys and Indians even
though he's way too old for it, and the town is happy because its
worst sanitary problem has just eliminated itself.

The news gets spread around and everybody starts laying odds on who's
gonna be the next to go. Nobody goes near the booths for about a week,
and then the kids start passing around a rumor Saturday morning that
Miss Alice Markey has submitted her resignation to the school board
and is packing to leave town.

The town splits. Half the people figure she'll be sensible and leave
by bus. The other half, myself included, station ourselves at the
_Paradise_ booth that's nearest to her apartment. Along about noon,
Miss Alice shows up. She's pale and determined looking, all dressed up
to travel. Her suitcase is leaking little bits and ends of clothing
and over her shoulder she's got a knapsack with her lunch in it.
Always practical, Miss Alice was.

"You aren't really thinking of leaving are you, Ma'm?" I ask, thinking
it would be a shame for a good-hearted, hard-working school teacher
like Miss Alice to leave Fremont.

"I'll thank you to mind your own business, young man!" she says
coldly, and marches into the booth and pulls the curtain shut. A
moment later I hear a coin drop, there's a flash of bright blue light,
and then dead silence.

I was the nearest one so I lifts the curtain and peeks in. Miss Alice
and her suitcase and knapsack have disappeared. I look at the screen
even though nobody needs to tell me that Miss Alice Markey has whisked
off to a world where all the men look like Rudolph Valentino and have
a fondness for old-maid school teachers. Sure enough, I was right....

About mid-August, Joe comes around and he's looking mighty worried.
"Harry," he says, "Wally Claus has disappeared."

I mull it over for a minute. "It can't be what you're thinking," I
says. "Wally's one of the most normal men in town."

We go down to see Wally's wife and I begin to get the picture. Wally
was one of those hard working, hard drinking Dutchmen with a family
about three times as big as his salary. He worked at Stellar Electric
with Joe and, like I say, sometimes he used to help Joe in his lab.

"When was the last time you saw Wally?" Joe asks gently.

Mrs. Wally is blubbering in her handkerchief and trying to hold a kid
on her lap at the same time. Two more are hanging onto her chair, and
about six others are standing around the room sucking their thumbs and
looking wide-eyed at Joe and me.

"It was p-payday," she blurts, the tears streaming down her fat
cheeks. "Wally c-comes home drunk and all I do was quietly ask him for
his paycheck. And that's the last I see of him. I d-don't know w-what
got into him!"

Anybody with half an eye, I thought, could piece together what had
happened. Wally probably had one or two at Schultz's bar and got to
feeling sorry for himself and then when he got home, he walked into a
hornet's nest. Nine kids bawling or running around and Mrs. Wally
nagging the life out of him. He must have wondered if it was worth it,
then found a quarter in his pocket and walked around the corner to the
nearest _Paradise_ booth. _Whisht_--and Wally's worries are a thing of
the past.

Joe and I get the idea at the same time and we chase down to the
nearest booth. I took one look at the screen and blushed. Wally had
some pretty wild ideas.

On the way home, I tried to talk Joe into tearing the machines down.
"How do you know where it's going to end, Joe?" I argues. "You can't
tell who's well-adjusted and who isn't any more. And besides, some of
those who ain't have contributed just as much to life as those who
are. Maybe even more."

"I'm going to leave them up," Joe says grimly. "The world will be
better off without a lot of neurotics running around."

"You won't think it over, Joe?"

"No," he says, "and to prove it, I'm going to spend the next two weeks
in New York looking for backing to put up _Paradise_ booths all across
the country."

"What does Marge think?" I ask.

"Hang Marge!" he says.

Well, I just stood there in the middle of the block and watched him
get smaller and smaller in the distance. I couldn't think of anything
more to say and he wouldn't have listened to me anyways.

I packed and left town that same night. The strawberry season was just
coming on and I ain't never missed a harvest yet.

       *       *       *       *       *

About two weeks passed and I couldn't stay away any longer. I got back
to town, took a look around, and then went down to the station to wait
for Joe to come in on the flyer. I figured somebody ought to be there
to break it to him gently.

He gets off the train looking happy and successful and I figure he's
made arrangements to put a _Paradise_ booth in every city, town, and
crossroads in the nation.

"Why, hello, Harry," he says when he sees me, and gives me the old
professional smile and handshake that really ain't the old Joe at all.
"Any cabs around?"

"No, there ain't no cabs around."

Something in the way I says it makes him give me a sharp look. "How
come? There's always a couple to meet the flyer."

"There ain't none this time," I says. "No cab drivers."

"No cab drivers?"

"Ain't no need for 'em any more," I says. "Ain't no people in town to
use cabs. Town's empty. Everybody's gone."

He looks kinda green and says: "What do you mean, everybody's gone?"

I shrugs and starts walking back to town. "Everybody took off," I
says. "Your _Paradise_ booths were real popular."

He still looks blank so I give it to him straight. I had first thought
about it when Wally Claus disappeared. It occurs to me then that
everybody has times when they wish they could crawl out from under and
quietly disappear. You see, Joe had assumed that some people were
adjusted to society and some weren't. Well, actually _nobody_ is, it's
just a difference of degree.

Once Wally took off, it sorta burst the dam. More and more people
sneaked into the booths, dropped in a quarter, and _whisht_--they were
a billion miles away.

It was lonely and dark in town. No street lamps, of course. There was
nobody down at the power plant to work the switches. And there weren't
any lights in the houses 'cause there wasn't anybody around.

"I can't imagine _everybody_ going," Joe says, biting his lip. "What
about all the kids?"

"I kinda think they were among the first," I says. I waves at the
starry sky. "There's probably a planet up there some place where
there's nothing but hot rods and football stadiums. And I suppose
there's one section of the universe fenced off for all the Junior
Spacemen that'll be roaming around it."

Anybody you could think of mighta had a reason for leaving, I told
him. The boys at Schultz's probably took off for a world where Marilyn
Monroe has a thousand twin sisters; and Johnny Douglas, the ace at
Kelly's Bowling Alley, is probably located on a world where it's
impossible to bowl anything but a three hundred game.

By then, we were in front of Joe's house. It was as dark and curtained
as the others.

       *       *       *       *       *

The house was empty. The blinds had been drawn, the dishes neatly
stacked and put away, and a note left on the doorstoop telling the
milkman not to bring any more milk.

The note to Joe was on the kitchen table. It was hard for Joe to read
on accounta it was blurred in spots where Marge had been crying and
the tears had fallen on the paper. It told Joe--among a whole mess of
other things--that she thought she had married a man, not a radio set,
and since everybody was using them she was going to visit a _Paradise_
booth that night.

"What am I going to do?" Joe asks remorsefully.

"That's your problem," I says heartlessly, thinking of all the chili
dinners that went with Marge. "You made the booths in the first
place."

"Yeah, I know." He pulls out a wad of papers from his pocket and
thumbs through them. "I got contracts here for a _Paradise_ booth in
every town over five thousand population. I could be a millionaire in
a month."

"Joe," I says, suddenly frightened, "don't do it. Look what happened
here in Fremont. Why man, if you put those things all over the country
there wouldn't be a soul left in the United States after a month had
gone by."

"You're right, Harry," he says. "Absolutely right." And he takes a
cigarette lighter out of his pocket and sets fire to the papers and
lets them burn 'til they're nothing but ashes.

"What are you gonna do with the booths in town?" I ask.

He goes down to the basement and comes up with a hatchet. "Come on,"
he says grimly. "I'll show you what I'm going to do with them!"

The first two we chop in small pieces until the walk is covered with
cogs and wheels and smashed tubes and dials. We stop at the third one.
That was the fanciest one of all, with the leather upholstery inside
and the big red neon sign on top that you could read halfway across
town.

Joe stares at it for a long minute, then makes up his mind. He fishes
around in his pocket for a coin.

"What do you think you're going to do?" I asks, alarmed.

"I'm going to look for Marge," he says. "I need a vacation anyways."

"How you gonna find her, Joe?" I asks. "You don't even know what kind
of a world to look for!"

"Yes, I do," Joe says wistfully. "It'll be the kind of world where
Marge always wanted to spend a vacation. Some place like up in
Massachusetts during the summer. White beaches, little wooden houses,
fishing boats and lobster pots.... She's described it to me so often I
could picture it down to the last pebble on the beach."

He gets into the booth.

"Think you'll ever be back, Joe?" I asks.

He drops a quarter in the coin slot and a picture builds up on the
screen of a beach with a little town in the distance.

"Sure," Joe says confidentially. "We'll be back." And then there's a
flash of blue light and Joe's gone, too.

I hung around for a couple of days afterward but Joe and Marge never
came back. I think he found her all right but Marge didn't want
anything to do with the old world so they just stayed there.

And that's about all there is, son. Except I've often wondered what
happened when strangers drove through and found Fremont a ghost
town....

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, lookahere, son, it's no cause for you to go calling me a liar
just because you never heard of Stellar Electric and Fremont ain't
listed on any map you've got. You didn't expect me to stay behind when
everybody else had left, did you? I always had a hankerin' for a
different type of world, too.

A world where a body didn't have to work so blamed hard and total
strangers would be willin' to listen to my stories and buy me a
beer....


...THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Worlds of Joe Shannon, by Frank M. Robinson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORLDS OF JOE SHANNON ***

***** This file should be named 32680.txt or 32680.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/8/32680/

Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
