The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Patriot, by Charles L. Fontenay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Patriot

Author: Charles L. Fontenay

Release Date: April 27, 2019 [EBook #59376]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PATRIOT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              THE PATRIOT

                        BY CHARLES L. FONTENAY

             _Earth was through with war. And while it is
           right that man have peace, it is also right that
         he have freedom. But Mars was in slavery, and to Mars
        Cornel Lorensse dedicated his life and his talent...._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Worlds of If Science Fiction, August 1955.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


_The Martianne_ is heard occasionally these days as a stirring concert
or band selection. But there was a time when its playing was punishable
by death--and its defiant strains challenged the harried police in
tavern and drawing room all over the Earth.

In the days just before one _marche militaire_ changed two worlds,
Earth was weary of war, afraid of war, and desired to put behind
it all reminders of war. The psychosociologists said uniforms of
policemen, of postmen, of airline pilots, of lodge brethren, of
theater ushers, were militaristic, and they were abolished. The
psychosociologists said the march rhythm in music was nationalistic
and instigated combative feelings, and it was banned. The scenes, the
sounds, the sights of antagonisms between men were forbidden.

The _Polonaise_, the _Marseillaise_, the _March of the Toys_, all
suffered the same fate. Sousa's marches and Tschaikovsky's _1812
Overture_ went the same way. _Dixie_ and the _Hawaiian War Chant_
were treated alike. All were relegated to tape in dusty archives, and
their sale or public performance forbidden on pain of fine and prison
sentence.

Whatever unlawful violence there might be on faraway Mars, Earth was
through with all forms of war and its trappings.

Into these circumstances, Cornel Lorensse intruded on the night of
December 6, 2010. He pressed his thin face against the steam-misted
window of _The Avatar_ in Nuyork and saw a piano standing idle inside.

_The Avatar_ was one of those small restaurants sunk a few feet below
sidewalk level, which catered with exotic dishes to the tastes of a
select group. It was well-populated at this hour, and Cornel licked his
lips hungrily at the epicurean delights unveiled at each table.

He felt in the pocket of his worn coveralls. A single coin answered the
exploration of his fingers. He was down to his last resource, and he
was no nearer to finding the Friends than he had been when he landed.

He looked again at the piano, hesitated, then went down the three steps
to the restaurant's door, pushed it open and went in. It was his good
fortune that Wan Ti, owner of _The Avatar_ was receiving his guests in
person at the moment.

"I'll play you a concert for a meal," said Cornel, gesturing toward the
piano.

Wan Ti's dark eyes swept over him, taking in the battered coveralls,
the earnest face, the untrimmed blond hair, the slender hands. Wan Ti's
yellow countenance remained bland.

"I have a piano player," said Wan Ti.

Cornel laughed, with a note of desperation in his tone.

"Let me play one selection," he urged. "If you want to stop me then,
you can kick me out."

What Wan Ti thought could not be gauged from his expression, but he had
not built his clientele against fierce competition by turning his face
away from the unusual. He inclined his head slightly, and waved Cornel
to the piano.

Cornel sat down at the keyboard, brushed his hair back from his eyes,
and flexed his long fingers. Thrusting the tantalizing aroma of food to
the back of his mind, he played.

The murmur of conversation in _The Avatar_ faltered and died as the
fervid melody of Beethoven's _Sonata Appassionata_ filled the air.
It was unusual music to people accustomed to hearing the more modern
compositions of Schonberg, Harris and Westine. The comparison of
Cornel's inspired touch to the mechanical renditions of Wan Ti's
regular piano player was noticeable even to those who were unfamiliar
with music.

When the final movements of the _allegro ma non troppo_ faded, Cornel
sat back and looked toward Wan Ti. The proprietor cocked an ear toward
the rare applause, smiled and nodded slightly. Exultantly, Cornel swung
into Chopin's _Fantasie-Impromptu_ and followed it, not pausing, with
Liszt's _Waldesrauschen_ and Schubert's _Serenade_.

The applause was just as enthusiastic, but by now the hum of voices
and the click of eating utensils had begun to rise again. Frowning
slightly, Cornel hunched his shoulders and began a composition the most
musical of his audience had never heard before.

Like the molten notes of the nightingale, the music floated and
throbbed above the diners, almost a physical thing. The people in the
restaurant paused with food halfway to their lips. They turned to see
the artist, carefully, so that no chair would scrape. The waiters
stopped with trays in their hands. Wan Ti stopped a newly arriving
couple, his fingers at his lips.

In the midst of the applause that roared through the room when Cornel
had finished, a waiter tapped his shoulder.

"Excuse me, sir," he said. "Miss Meta Erosine asks that you join her at
her table."

Rising and bowing to his audience, Cornel followed the man to a table
at the rear of the room, where a woman sat with her escort.

Meta Erosine's pale, heart-shaped face, with its mop of short black
hair and luminous black eyes, was widely known on Earth, but Cornel
had never been to Earth before. Her vibrant beauty blazed on a victim
unprepared for it.

She was clad in the cretan-can-can style just then becoming popular,
with breasts exposed over a tight bodice and a short, ruffled skirt
gathered in front to reveal the knees. She smoked a long-stemmed,
tiny-bowled pipe, studded with jewels.

Beside her sat a sleek, mustached young man in ruffled lavender shirt
and pink tights, his fingers covered with rings.

"Sit down and eat with me, musician," invited Meta. Somewhat dubiously,
Cornel took a seat at her right, across the table from the beruffled
escort.

"Meta, I wish you wouldn't demean yourself by taking up with tramps and
guttersnipes," objected her companion, wrinkling his nose.

"Leave me, Passo," she ordered, waving an imperious hand. "Why should I
sup with painted popinjays when I can adore genius?"

Passo flushed and his mouth fell open. But he arose and slunk quietly
away.

"Now, musician," said Meta, leaning over the table so that her powdered
breasts brushed the glassware, "tell me, what was that last number you
played?"

"One of my own compositions," he said diffidently. The odor of food was
too much for him, and he leaned across the table to appropriate Passo's
untouched salad. "Its name is _Wind in the Canals_."

"It should be _Le Vent dans les Canals_," she said. "You should title
your compositions in French--they will be more fashionable."

"I don't know French," he said, munching a stick of celery. "We don't
speak French on Mars."

She laughed, a laugh like the music of his playing.

"You will, my genius," she promised him. Her eyes ran over his lean
face, his unkempt hair. "You look as though you could use shelter and
clothing. Come home with me tonight. I shall give your genius to the
world."

       *       *       *       *       *

Cornel never had experienced such luxury as was his in the apartment
Meta assigned to him in her magnificent home in Jersi. He had his
personal servant. New clothes were waiting for him. A barber cut his
hair when he had finished a hot, scented bath, and the big bed in which
he slept was soft as down.

Meta asked no information of him until they met at a late breakfast
the next morning. There, beautiful in translucent white negligee, she
sipped her coffee and asked questions.

"I came from Mars to get help for my people," he said. "We need guns
and supplies, food and oxygen equipment."

"You're one of the Charax rebels?" she asked.

"Rebels?" He snorted. "We're free people, fighting for our freedom. We
want self-government, we want to own our land and our homes, we want
the right to rule our own lives."

"That's guaranteed in the Constitution," said Meta.

"Earth's Constitution. Mars isn't Earth. The Mars Corporation controls
both spaceports. It owns all business and industry on Mars. It's
milking the planet dry of resources and profits, and it's set up a
company government that makes the people of Mars no better than slaves."

He smiled a bitter smile.

"Earth's government protects the freedom of Earth's people," he said,
"but the people of Earth don't know what's happening on Mars. The Mars
Corporation has its senators and representatives, bought and paid for,
so the Earth government sends troops and supplies to Mars to fight the
battles of the Mars Corporation. We aren't rebels, we're fighting for
our just freedom."

"If the Mars Corporation controls the spaceports, how did you get to
Earth?" she demanded.

"We have three battered ships hidden in the desert near Syrtis Major,"
said Cornel. "It takes a long time for us to get fuel to take one of
them up, but they thought it worthwhile if I could get to Earth and get
help for my people."

"Why you?"

"My music is well known on Mars, and my people know that the people of
Earth love music. Here on Earth, where there is peace and prosperity,
people pay to hear good music and good musicians. Our plan was for me
to give great concerts and at each concert ask the people of Earth to
help their Martian brothers gain their freedom."

"A good way to get arrested," said Meta dryly. "You'd be convicted
of inciting military action and sentenced to prison in any court of
Earth."

"I didn't know that, but I suppose the Friends would have a way."

"The Friends?"

"The Friends of Mars. It's an organization of Earth people trying to
help us. I suppose it must be a secret and illegal organization, for
I found that the man I was supposed to get in touch with had been
arrested, and I haven't been able to find out anything more about the
Friends."

"Such an organization would be illegal on Earth," said Meta. "Come
here, Cornel. I want to show you something."

Taking him by the arm, she led him from the breakfast room to a terrace
overlooking a snowy valley. She moved closer to him in the chill wind
that billowed her thin garments around her, and waved her hand at the
scene below them.

"This is Earth," she said. "Look at those mountain peaks, the blue sky
and the white clouds. In summer, this valley is clothed with green, and
warm breezes bring the scent of flowers to this terrace. Have you ever
seen anything like this on Mars?"

"No," he said softly. "Mars is always cold and dusty, and the sky is
nearly black."

"Cornel," she said softly, you're a great musician. Mars is rough
frontier territory, and the frontier has no place for music. Last night
you saw what your music could mean here.

"Forget Mars. You belong to Earth."

       *       *       *       *       *

The meteoric rise of Cornel Lorensse to fame in 2011 and 2012 now
commands a full column in the _Encyclopaedia Terrestriana_. Brushed off
in a single sentence in the encyclopaedia, but much discussed in that
day, was his close relationship with Meta Erosine, his patroness.

For half a decade, wealthy, beautiful Meta Erosine had been the toast
of Earth. She was an actress, a painter, a singer, a socialite, and she
had changed men almost as often as she changed the dresses she wore.
Her face was familiar in newspapers and on television screens, her
husky songs were on a million recording tapes, her colorful antics were
the grist for magazine articles and the subject of denunciations from
the pulpit.

In Cornel she seemed to have found a vehicle for all the burning fire
of her energy. She pushed him, she groomed him, she threw the power of
her wealth behind him. His slender figure clad in a black velvet suit
sat at polished pianos on a hundred stages; and for each concert, the
auditoriums and the audiences were bigger.

Meta was with him on these concert tours; and between tours he stayed
in seclusion at the big house in Jersi, putting into music his
memories of his native Mars. Each tour introduced to the world the new
compositions of Cornel Lorensse.

What he wrote and played was the haunting music of the deserts, the
canals and the marches. Into his music he poured the loneliness of
the red sands and the violence of the desert winds, the beauty of
sable skies jeweled with enormous stars, the happiness of the helmeted
traveler when he reaches the green valleys of the canals, the hopes
and joys of human lovers gathered in bubble-like domes amid the chill
wastelands.

He did not, as Meta had wanted to, give his compositions French
titles. He named them as he would have named them on Mars: _The Desert
Wanderer_, _Swift Phobos_, _Marsh Gardens_, names that were strange to
Earth, but were familiar themes of his own people.

His melodies took music-loving Earth by storm. They burst upon a
world in which 20th century dissonance had strangled 19th century
romanticism, like flowers in a garden of crystal. It was Cornel
Lorensse and those pioneer composers who avidly aped him who began the
21st century Renaissance in music.

Without shame, Cornel lived on the largesse of his patroness, for his
growing fees and royalties all went for one purpose. He had found the
society called the Friends of Mars, and everything that he earned he
poured into their coffers to finance privateer space vessels able to
elude the Mars Corporation's company-owned warships and to keep a thin
line of supplies flowing to the Free Martian people scattered in their
desert strongholds.

Like any secret society in a hostile culture, the Friends of Mars
maintained dissociated chapters, connected by the slenderest and most
carefully guarded lines of communication. Cornel knew of only one
chapter, in Nuyork, and to this he took his contributions when he was
between concert tours.

During one of those visits, late in the summer of 2012, Javan Tomlin,
chief of the chapter, told him that all he contributed was still not
enough for Mars to become free.

"Our base of support isn't broad enough," said Javan. "Ships cost
money, fuel costs money, supplies cost money. Guns and ammunition are
most expensive of all, because military weapons are illegal. No one man
can support such an operation, even when he makes the kind of money
you're making."

There were half a dozen of the Friends of Mars, besides Cornel and
Javan, in the meeting room. The others nodded agreement at Javan's
words.

"None of us are wealthy and we can't contribute much but our time and
work," said one of them. "The wealthy people all sympathize with the
Mars Corporation."

"That's too much of a blanket indictment," said Javan. "The Mars
Corporation controls the spacelines to Mars, and what little
information comes back to Earth is censored and heavily propagandized
in their favor. Most people don't know what's happening on Mars. Our
people need a powerful radio transmitter to broadcast to Earth, Cornel."

Cornel shook his head.

"What information the people of Earth get must be disseminated on
Earth," he said. "Powerful radio equipment would take up space and
weight needed for arms. Besides, the Mars Corporation forces have air
power and directional finders. They'd bomb a permanent installation
before it had a chance to send out its second broadcast."

"All we can do is work and hope," said Javan gloomily. "If we had a
fleet of about a dozen good ships, we might be able to swing it, but we
have only two and a third abuilding."

"There are three on Mars," Cornel pointed out.

"One was blasted in space last week, and they're too old to lift more
than half cargo, anyhow," said Javan. "The corporation controls the
Earth space stations, through the government, and we have to use direct
drive stage-rockets."

Cornel left, not feeling very optimistic. At the curb outside the club,
he looked up and down the street for a cab to take him to the heliport
where his copter was parked.

There was no cab in sight, but from a side street a little distance
away a long black limousine swung into the boulevard, sped swiftly to
the club entrance and halted. The back door opened and Meta leaned out,
beckoning.

"Get in, quick!" she urged. "We've got to get away from here!"

Not understanding, Cornel got in. The car roared away with a burst of
acceleration that thrust him back on the cushions beside her.

"What in Saturn?" he demanded and turned to look out the rear window.

A squad of police cars was converging on the club he had just left.
Sirens screaming, they pulled up, blocking the street, and armed
officers in plain clothes leaped out and hurried into the club.

Meta put her arms around his neck and drew his head down to her lap.

"They're raiding the Friends of Mars," she said, and a soothing note
crept into her tone. "You're safe, darling. They don't know you were
there."

"But how did they know? How did you know?" he demanded, struggling
unsuccessfully to free himself from the imprisonment of her embrace.
The sound of the sirens had died in the distance behind them.

"I told them," Meta said firmly. "Where do you think I get the wealth
you've been living on, darling? I own a fourth of the stock of the Mars
Corporation."

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning, Cornel had disappeared. Meta was frantic. Every
available agency was pressed into service, but Nuyork was a city of
fifteen million people and Cornel had vanished.

It was two weeks before he returned. When he did, he was gaunt and grim
and dirty as he had been the night Meta had first seen him in _The
Avatar_.

"Darling, why did you run away?" she asked, holding him close in her
arms.

"I came back because I love you," he answered tiredly. "But I came
back, too, because I love Mars more, Meta. I had to go away and think
what I was to do."

"It's all right now," she soothed. "You understand that the odds
against your rebels are just too heavy. You have a life on Earth to
live."

"Yes," he said in a low voice. "But there'll be no concerts this
season, Meta."

"Cornel, you can't cancel now! The schedule's all arranged."

"I shall cancel," he said firmly. "You want me to live on Earth, so you
must let me learn about Earth. I intend to spend this winter studying
psychosociology and terrestrial law--and composing."

Her brow cleared.

"If you'll continue your composing, it's all right," she said. "Next
season's concerts can be the greatest ever. I'll pay off the promoters,
darling."

So it was done. That season the admirers of Cornel Lorensse's music had
to content themselves with recordings. Cornel himself spent his time
quietly at Nuyork University and at the house in Jersi.

As she had said, the 2013 concert season was Cornel's greatest, right
from the start. In part it was due to Meta's own efforts, for she spent
tremendous sums of money and utilized her own famous personality to
great advantage in promotional work.

Across the nation, across the the world, the tour swept, snowballing
constantly. Christmas of 2013, and Cornel Lorensse introduced a great
new hymn, _From the Polar Caps_. New Year's Day, 2014, and _The Years
to Come_ was introduced by radio and television at a thousand parties.

There had been some quibbling at the beginning of the season, because
the business directors of the tour had wanted to combine the drawing
power of Cornel's name with that of well-known concert orchestras.
Cornel insisted on using his own orchestra, built up carefully during
his year of study. As the season progressed, it became apparent that
Cornel's name alone was enough of a drawing card.

February, March, 2014, and every network had bought into the schedule.
When Cornel Lorensse's weekly concerts were on the air, there was
nothing else on radio or television, anywhere in the world, except on
the non-affiliated local stations. April passed triumphantly, and the
final concert was scheduled for May 15 in Rome.

The D'Annunzio Colosseum, built in 1971, was filled to capacity.
Careful staging was necessary, to care for all the cameras and
microphones of the various television and radio networks.

The program was not a long one: Debussy's _Clair de Lune_, Lorensse's
_Swift Phobos_, Beethoven's _Moonlight Sonata_, Waco's _Variations on a
Theme by Altdown_--and the words "To be announced." It was a familiar
phrase, and it always meant the introduction of a new composition by
Cornel Lorensse.

The concert went smoothly before--how many listeners? Fifty million? A
hundred million? Two hundred million? On the great, brightly lighted
stage Cornel played the concert grand with superb mastery and bowed to
the applause, a pale, solemn figure in black.

When he had acknowledged the acclamation after the Waco piece, the
audience waited in hushed silence for his announcement of the final
number on the program.

"The composition I am about to play is the culmination of my musical
career," Cornel said quietly into the microphones. "It is a product of
my studies, not only of music, but of psychosociology and law.

"In hypnoschool last year, I studied the effects of music on the human
mind. It is a new field, and many of you are aware of it only through
the fact that certain kinds of music are forbidden by law as dangerous
to peace on Earth.

"I have tried to go into it much more deeply than that."

He smiled bitterly.

"Most of you know that I am a Martian, one of the so-called Martian
rebels," he said. "I think much of the appeal of my music to you has
been its Martian quality. To the people of Earth, most of whom have
never seen Mars, it has pictured my planet.

"My latest composition will do so even more graphically, for it has
been composed on a deliberate psychological foundation. This song will
show Mars to you. It will show you my people, and what my people want.

"I may add that I have studied the law carefully, and I can assure you
that this composition is not military in nature.

"Ladies and gentlemen of Earth, accompanied by the orchestra I shall
now play _The Martianne_."

In the control rooms of the auditorium and of relay points throughout
the world, censors, vaguely alarmed by Cornel's words, hovered with
their fingers on cutoff keys. Then they relaxed. Cornel had told the
truth. There was nothing of a military nature in the opening bars of
_The Martianne_.

It was a theme handled, but less competently, in some of his other
compositions. The woodwinds began on a soft, sad note, gradually rising
in power, like the thin winds that moaned across the Martian desert
sands. Into this, almost inaudibly at first, crept the clear piano
notes that marked the cautious, wondering intrusion of humanity on an
alien world.

The drums beat the construction of the domes, the horns blared the
landing of the spaceships, the violins cried the hopes of the men
and women who went to Mars to find a new life. It was a picture in
music, so skilfully drawn that when the first discordance crept in,
every listener could identify it instantly as the age-old greed of man
seeking to subvert frontier freedoms to his own selfish ends.

When the blare of trumpets and the ruffle of drums thundered into the
final militant theme of _The Martianne_, every listener knew it bespoke
the valiant fight of men for freedom against an oppressor.

Every listener knew what he heard was music that had been prohibited
on Earth for a decade--yet they listened. The censors, shocked,
galvanized, started to act, to cut off the broadcast--and could not.
The powerful music had crept insidiously into their minds, and their
fingers were paralyzed above the keys while _The Martianne_ flamed
triumphant through the air of Earth.

When the final note had died away, Cornel stood up at his piano and
said into the microphones:

"That is the music of Mars. Remember it, people of Earth."

It was a brief trial. Cornel was admittedly guilty of violating the law
against inciting the public to military action, but because of Meta's
influence and the temper of the people, he was not sentenced to prison.
He was deported to Mars, freed to return to his own people.

Spurred by the Mars Corporation, the Earth government acted
quickly. _The Martianne_ was the most dangerous of any music the
psychosociologists had banned. Its performance was prohibited on
pain of death, possession of a tape of it was punishable by fine and
imprisonment.

But too many tapes had been home-recorded on the night of Cornel's
last concert. Too many people remembered the basic strains, the theme
of _The Martianne_. Laws could not confine it. It was hummed, at first
secretly, then openly and defiantly.

And too many people had hung on every televised instant of Cornel's
trial and had heard him say, simply and earnestly, why he had violated
the laws designed to protect the peace of Earth, why he had willingly
endangered his life.

"It is right that men should have peace," said Cornel on the witness
stand, "but first, it is right that they should have freedom."

At first secretly, then openly and defiantly, the Friends of Mars grew
into an organization that poured the contributions of the people of
Earth into ships and guns for the free people of Mars.

Every Martian year they play it formally now, on the anniversary of the
signing of the Mars Charter. In solemn ceremonies, the military band
of Mars plays _The Martianne_ before the imposing edifice erected at
Charax by Meta Erosine in memory of Cornel Lorensse, the patriot who
died in action during the final siege of Mars City.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Patriot, by Charles L. Fontenay

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PATRIOT ***

***** This file should be named 59376.txt or 59376.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/3/7/59376/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
