                            The Lonely Ones


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.

Title: The Lonely Ones

Author: Edward W. Ludwig

Release Date: December 12, 2011 [EBook #38302]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LONELY ONES ***




Produced by Frank van Drogen, Greg Weeks, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.

    The Lonely Ones

    By Edward W. Ludwig

    Illustrated by PAUL ORBAN

    _The line between noble dreams and madness is thin, and
    loneliness can push men past it...._


Onward sped the _Wanderer_, onward through cold, silent infinity, on and
on, an insignificant pencil of silver lost in the terrible, brooding
blackness.

But even more awful than the blackness was the loneliness of the six men
who inhabited the silver rocket. They moved in loneliness as fish move
in water. Their lives revolved in loneliness as planets revolve in space
and time. They bore their loneliness like a shroud, and it was as much a
part of them as sight in their eyes. Loneliness was both their brother
and their god.

Yet, like a tiny flame in the darkness, there was hope, a savage,
desperate hope that grew with the passing of each day, each month, and
each year.

And at last....

"Lord," breathed Captain Sam Wiley.

Lieutenant Gunderson nodded. "It’s a big one, isn’t it?"

"It’s a big one," repeated Captain Wiley.

They stared at the image in the _Wanderer’s_ forward visi-screen, at the
great, shining gray ball. They stared hard, for it was like an
enchanted, God-given fruit handed them on a star-flecked platter of
midnight. It was like the answer to a thousand prayers, a shining symbol
of hope which could mean the end of loneliness.

"It’s ten times as big as Earth," mused Lieutenant Gunderson. "Do you
think this’ll be it, Captain?"

"I’m afraid to think."

A thoughtful silence.

"Captain."

"Yes?"

"Do you hear my heart pounding?"

Captain Wiley smiled. "No. No, of course not."

"It seems like everybody should be hearing it. But we shouldn’t get
excited, should we? We mustn’t hope too hard." He bit his lip. "But
there _should_ be life there, don’t you think, Captain?"

"There may be."

"Nine years, Captain. Think of it. It’s taken us nine years to get here.
There’s _got_ to be life."

"Prepare for deceleration, Lieutenant."

Lieutenant Gunderson’s tall, slim body sagged for an instant. Then his
eyes brightened.

"Yes, sir!"

                                  ————

Captain Sam Wiley continued to stare at the beautiful gray globe in the
visi-screen. He was not like Gunderson, with boyish eagerness and
anxiety flowing out of him in a ceaseless babble. His emotion was as
great, or greater, but it was imprisoned within him, like swirling,
foaming liquid inside a corked jug.

It wouldn’t do to encourage the men too much. Because, if they were
disappointed....

He shook his silver-thatched head. There it was, he thought. A new
world. A world that, perhaps, held life.

Life. It was a word uttered only with reverence, for throughout the
Solar System, with the exception of on Earth, there had been only death.

First it was the Moon, airless and lifeless. That had been expected, of
course.

But Mars. For centuries men had dreamed of Mars and written of Mars with
its canals and dead cities, with its ancient men and strange animals.
Everyone _knew_ there was or had been life on Mars.

The flaming rockets reached Mars, and the canals became volcanic
crevices, and the dead cities became jagged peaks of red stone, and the
endless sands were smooth, smooth, smooth, untouched by feet of living
creatures. There was plant-life, a species of green-red lichen in the
Polar regions. But nowhere was there real life.

Then Venus, with its dust and wind. No life there. Not even the stars to
make one think of home. Only the dust and wind, a dark veil of death
screaming eternally over hot dry land.

And Jupiter, with its seas of ice; and hot Mercury, a cracked, withered
mummy of a planet, baked as hard and dry as an ancient walnut in a
furnace.

Next, the airless, rocky asteroids, and frozen Saturn with its swirling
ammonia snows. And last, the white, silent worlds, Uranus, Neptune, and
Pluto.

World after world, all dead, with no sign of life, no reminder of life,
and no promise of life.

Thus the loneliness had grown. It was not a child of Earth. It was not
born in the hearts of those who scurried along city pavements or of
those in the green fields or of those in the cool, clean houses.

It was a child of the incredible distances, of the infinite night, of
emptiness and silence. It was born in the hearts of the slit-eyed men,
the oldish young men, the spacemen.

For without life on other worlds, where was the sky’s challenge? Why go
on and on to discover only worlds of death?

The dream of the spacemen turned from the planets to the stars.
Somewhere in the galaxy or in other galaxies there _had_ to be life.
Life was a wonderful and precious thing. It wasn’t right that it should
be confined to a single, tiny planet. If it were, then life would seem
meaningless. Mankind would be a freak, a cosmic accident.

And now the _Wanderer_ was on the first interstellar flight, hurtling
through the dark spaces to Proxima Centauri. Moving silently, as if
motionless, yet at a speed of 160,000 miles a second. And ahead loomed
the great, gray planet, the only planet of the sun, growing larger,
larger, each instant....

                                  ————

A gentle, murmuring hum filled the ship. The indicator lights on the
control panel glowed like a swarm of pink eyes.

"Deceleration compensator adjusted for 12 G’s, sir," reported Lieutenant
Gunderson.

Captain Wiley nodded, still studying the image of the planet.

"There—there’s something else, Captain."

"Yes?"

"It’s Brown, sir. He’s drunk."

Captain Wiley turned, a scowl on his hard, lined face. "Drunk? Where’d
he get the stuff?"

"He saved it, sir, saved it for nine years. Said he was going to drink
it when we discovered life."

"We haven’t discovered life yet."

"I know. He said he wouldn’t set foot on the planet if he was sober.
Said if there isn’t life there, he couldn’t take it—unless he was
drunk."

Captain Wiley grunted. "All right."

They looked at the world.

"Wouldn’t it be wonderful, Captain? Just think—to meet another race. It
wouldn’t matter what they were like, would it? If they were primitive,
we could teach them things. If they were ahead of us, they could teach
us. You know what I’d like? To have someone meet us, to gather around
us. It wouldn’t matter if they were afraid of us or even if they tried
to kill us. We’d know that we aren’t alone."

"I know what you mean," said Captain Wiley. Some of his emotion
overflowed the prison of his body. "There’s no thrill in landing on dead
worlds. If no one’s there to see you, you don’t feel like a hero."

"That’s it, Captain! That’s why I came on this crazy trip. I guess
that’s why we all came. I...."

Captain Wiley cleared his throat. "Lieutenant, commence deceleration. 6
G’s."

"Yes, sir!"

The planet grew bigger, filling the entire visi-screen.

Someone coughed behind Captain Wiley.

"Sir, the men would like to look at the screen. They can’t see the
planet out of the ports yet." The speaker was Doyle, the ship’s
Engineer, a dry, tight-skinned little man.

"Sure." Captain Wiley stepped aside.

Doyle looked, then Parker and Fong. Just three of them, for Watkins had
sliced his wrists the fourth year out. And Brown was drunk.

As they looked, a realization came to Captain Wiley. The men were
getting old. The years had passed so gradually that he’d never really
noticed it before. Lieutenant Gunderson had been a kid just out of Space
Academy. Parker and Doyle and Fong, too, had been in their twenties.
They had been boys. And now something was gone—the sharp eyes and sure
movements of youth, the smooth skin and thick, soft hair.

Now they had become men. And yet for a few moments, as they gazed at the
screen, they seemed like happy, expectant children.

"I wish Brown could see this," Doyle murmured. "He says now he isn’t
going to get off his couch till we land and discover life. Says he won’t
dare look for himself."

"The planet’s right for life," said Fong, the dark-faced
astro-physicist. "Atmosphere forty per cent oxygen, lots of water vapor.
No poisonous gases, according to spectroscopic analyses. It should be
ideal for life."

"There _is_ life there," said Parker, the radarman. "You know why?
Because we’ve given up eighteen years of our lives. Nine years to get
here, nine to get back. I’m thirty now. I was twenty-one when we left
Earth. I gave up all those good years. They say that you can have
something if you pay enough for it. Well, we’ve paid for this. There has
to be a—a sort of universal justice. That’s why I know there’s life
here, life that moves and thinks—maybe even life we can talk to."

"You need a drink," said Fong.

"It’s getting bigger," murmured Lieutenant Gunderson.

"The Centaurians," mused Doyle, half to himself. "What’ll they be like?
Monsters or men? If Parker’s right about universal justice, they’ll be
men."

"Hey, where there’s men, there’s women!" yelled Parker. "A Centaurian
woman! Say!"

"Look at those clouds!" exclaimed Doyle. "Damn it, we can’t see the
surface."

"Hey, there! Look there, to the right! See it? It’s silver, down in a
hole in the clouds. It’s like a city!"

"Maybe it’s just water."

"No, it’s a city!"

"Bring ’er down, Captain. God, Captain, bring ’er down fast!"

"Drag Brown in here! He ought to see this!"

"Can’t you bring ’er down faster, Captain?"

"Damn it, it _is_ a city!"

"Why doesn’t someone get Brown?"

"Take to your couches, men," said Captain Wiley. "Landing’s apt to be a
bit bumpy. Better strap yourselves in."

                                  ————

Down went the rocket, more slowly now, great plumes of scarlet
thundering from its forward braking jets. Down, down into soft,
cotton-like clouds, the whiteness sliding silently past the ports.

Suddenly, a droning voice:

"To those in the ship from the planet called Earth: Please refrain from
landing at this moment. You will await landing instructions."

Parker leaped off his couch, grasping a stanchion for support. "That
voice! It was human!"

Captain Wiley’s trembling hand moved over the jet-control panel. The
ship slowed in its descent. The clouds outside the portholes became
motionless, a milky whiteness pressed against the ship.

"The voice!" Parker cried again. "Am I crazy? Did everyone hear it?"

Captain Wiley turned away from the panel. "We heard it, Parker. It was
in our minds. Telepathy."

He smiled. "Yes, the planet is inhabited. There are intelligent beings
on it. Perhaps they’re more intelligent than we are."

It was strange. The men had hoped, dreamed, prayed for this moment. Now
they sat stunned, unable to comprehend, their tongues frozen.

"We’ll see them very soon," said Captain Wiley, his voice quivering.
"We’ll wait for their directions."

Breathlessly, they waited.

Captain Wiley’s fingers drummed nervously on the base of the control
panel. Lieutenant Gunderson rose from his couch, stood in the center of
the cabin, then returned to his couch.

Silence, save for the constant, rumbling roar of the jets which held the
ship aloft.

"I wonder how long it’ll be," murmured Fong at last.

"It seems like a long time!" burst Parker.

"We’ve waited nine years," said Captain Wiley. "We can wait a few more
minutes."

They waited.

"Good Lord!" said Parker. "How long is it going to be? What time is it?
We’ve been waiting an hour! What kind of people are they down there?"

"Maybe they’ve forgotten about us," said Fong.

"That’s it!" cried Parker. "They’ve forgotten about us! Hey, you! Down
there—you that talked to us! We’re still here, damn it! We want to
land!"

"Parker," said Captain Wiley, sternly.

Parker sat down on his couch, his lips quivering.

Then came the voice:

"We regret that a landing is impossible at this moment. Our field is
overcrowded, and your vessel is without priority. You must wait your
turn."

Captain Wiley stared forward at nothing. "Whoever you are," he
whispered, "please understand that we have come a long way to reach your
planet. Our trip...."

"We do not wish to discuss your trip. You will be notified when landing
space is available."

Captain Wiley’s body shook. "Wait, tell us who you are. What do you look
like? Tell us...."

"Talking to you is quite difficult. We must form our thoughts so as to
form word-patterns in your minds. You will be notified."

"Wait a minute!" called Captain Wiley.

No answer.

Captain Wiley straightened in an effort to maintain dignity.

They waited....

                                  ————

It was night.

The darkness was an impenetrable blanket, a solid thing, like thick
black velvet glued over the ports. It was worse than the darkness of
space.

Captain Wiley sat before the control panel, slowly beating his fists
against the arms of his chair, a human metronome ticking off the slow
seconds.

Parker stood before a porthole.

"Hey, look, Captain! There’s a streak of red, like a meteor. And there’s
another!"

Captain Wiley rose, looked out. "They’re rockets. They’re going to land.
These people are highly advanced."

His face became grim. Below them lay a planet, an intelligent race
hidden beneath clouds and darkness. What manner of creatures were they?
How great was their civilization? What marvelous secrets had their
scientists discovered? What was their food like, their women, their
whiskey?

The questions darted endlessly through his mind like teasing
needle-points. All these wondrous things lay below them, and here they
sat, like starving men, their hands tied, gazing upon a steaming but
unobtainable dinner. So near and yet so far.

He trembled. The emotion grew within him until it burst out as water
bursts through the cracked wall of a dam. He became like Parker.

"Why should we wait?" he yelled. "Why must we land in their field?
Parker! Prepare to release flares! We’re going down! We’ll land
anywhere—in a street, in the country. We don’t have to wait for orders!"

Parker bounced off his couch. Someone called, "Brown, we’re going to
land!"

A scurrying of feet, the rush of taut-muscled bodies, the babble of
excited voices.

"We’re going down!"

"_We’re going down!_"

The grumble of the _Wanderer’s_ jets loudened, softened, spluttered,
loudened again. Vibration filled the ship as it sank downward.

Suddenly it lurched upward, like a child’s ball caught in a stream of
rising water. The jolt staggered the men. They seized stanchions and
bulkhead railings to keep their balance.

"What the hell?"

Abruptly, the strange movement ceased. The ship seemed motionless. There
was no vibration.

"Captain," said Lieutenant Gunderson. "There’s no change in altitude.
We’re still at 35,000 feet, no more, no less."

"We _must_ be going down," said Captain Wiley, puzzled. "Kill jets 4 and
6."

The Lieutenant’s hands flicked off two switches. A moment later:
"There’s no change, Captain."

Then came the voice:

"To those in the vessel from the planet Earth: Please do not oppose
orders of the Landing Council. You are the first visitors in the history
of our world whom we have had to restrain with physical force. You will
be notified when landing space is available."

                                  ————

Morning.

The warm sunlight streamed into the clouds, washing away the last
shadows and filtering through the portholes.

The men breakfasted, bathed, shaved, smoked, sat, twisted their fingers,
looked out the ports. They were silent men, with dark shadows about
their eyes and with tight, white-lipped mouths.

Frequently, the clouds near them were cut by swift, dark shapes swooping
downward. The shapes were indistinct in the cotton-like whiteness, but
obviously they were huge, like a dozen _Wanderers_ made into one.

"Those ships are big," someone murmured, without enthusiasm.

"It’s a busy spaceport," grumbled Captain Wiley.

Thoughts, words, movements came so slowly it was like walking under
water. Enthusiasm was dead. The men were automatons, sitting, waiting,
eating, sitting, waiting.

A day passed, and a night.

"Maybe they’ve forgotten us," said Fong.

No one answered. The thought had been voiced before, a hundred times.

Then, at last, the droning words:

"To those in the vessel from the planet Earth: You will now land. We
will carry you directly over the field. Then you will descend straight
down. The atmosphere is suitable to your type of life and is free of
germs. You will not need protection."

The men stared at one another.

"Hey," Doyle said, "did you hear that? He says we can go down."

The men blinked. Captain Wiley swallowed hard. He rose with a stiff,
slow, nervous hesitancy.

"We’re going down," he mumbled, as if repeating the words over and over
in his mind and trying to believe them.

The men stirred as realization sprouted and grew. They stirred like
lethargic animals aroused from the long, dreamless sleep of hibernation.

"We’re going to land," breathed Parker, unbelievingly.

The _Wanderer_ moved as though caught in the grip of a giant, invisible
hand.

The voice said:

"You may now descend."

Captain Wiley moved to the jet-control panel. "Lieutenant!" he snapped.
"Wake up. Let’s go!"

The ship sank downward through the thick sea of clouds. The men walked
to the ports. A tenseness, an excitement grew in their faces, like dying
flame being fanned into its former brilliancy.

Out of the clouds loomed monstrous, shining, silver spires and towers,
Cyclopean bridges, gigantic lake-like mirrors, immense golden spheres.
It was a nightmare world, a jungle of fantastic shape and color.

The men gasped, whispered, murmured, the flame of their excitement
growing, growing.

"The whole planet is a city!" breathed Parker.

                                  ————

Thump!

The _Wanderer_ came to rest on a broad landing field of light blue
stone. The jets coughed, spluttered, died. The ship quivered, then lay
still, its interior charged with an electric, pregnant silence.

"You first, Captain." Lieutenant Gunderson’s voice cracked, and his face
was flushed. "You be the first to go outside."

Captain Wiley stepped through the airlock, his heart pounding. It was
over now—all the bewilderment, the numbness.

And his eyes were shining. He’d waited so long that it was hard to
believe the waiting was over. But it was, he told himself. The journey
was over, and the waiting, and now the loneliness would soon be over.
Mankind was not alone. It was a good universe after all!

He stepped outside, followed by Lieutenant Gunderson, then by Parker,
Doyle and Fong.

He rubbed his eyes. This couldn’t be! A world like this couldn’t exist!
He shook his head, blinked furiously.

"It—it can’t be true," he mumbled to Lieutenant Gunderson. "We’re still
on the ship—dreaming."

The landing field was huge, perhaps ten miles across, and its sides were
lined with incredible ships, the smallest of which seemed forty times as
large as the _Wanderer_. There were silver ships, golden ships, black
ships, round ships, transparent ships, cigar-shaped ships, flat-topped
ships.

And scattered over the field were—creatures.

A few were the size of men, but most were giants by comparison. Some
were humanoid, some reptilian. Some were naked, some clad in helmeted
suits, some enveloped with a shimmering, water-like luminescence. The
creatures walked, slithered, floated, crawled.

Beyond the ships and the field lay the great city, its web-work of
towers, minarets, spheres and bridges like the peaks of an enormous
mountain range stretching up into space itself. The structures were like
the colors of a rainbow mixed in a cosmic paint pot, molded and
solidified into fantastic shapes by a mad god.

"I—I’m going back to the ship," stammered Parker. The whiteness of death
was in his face. "I’m going to stay with Brown."

He turned, and then he screamed.

"Captain, the ship’s moving!"

Silently, the _Wanderer_ was drifting to the side of the field.

The toneless voice said:

"We are removing your vessel so that other descending ships will not
damage it."

Captain Wiley shouted into the air. "Wait! Don’t go away! Help us! Where
can we see you?"

The voice seemed to hesitate. "It is difficult for us to speak in
thoughts that you understand."

                                  ————

Silence.

Captain Wiley studied the faces of his men. They were not faces of
conquerors or of triumphant spacemen. They were the faces of dazed,
frightened children who had caught a glimpse of Hell. He attempted,
feebly, to smile.

"All right," he said loudly, "so it isn’t like we expected. So no one
came to meet us with brass bands and ten cent flags. We’ve still
succeeded, haven’t we? We’ve found life that’s intelligent beyond our
comprehension. What if our own civilization is insignificant by
comparison? Look at those beings. Think of what we can learn from them.
Why, their ships might have exceeded the speed of light. They might be
from other galaxies!"

"Let’s find out," said Parker.

They strode to the nearest ship, an immense, smooth, bluish sphere. Two
creatures stood before it, shaped like men and yet twice the size of
men. They wore white, skin-tight garments that revealed muscular bodies
like those of gods.

They looked at Captain Wiley and smiled.

One of them pointed toward the _Wanderer_. Their smiles widened and then
they laughed.

They laughed gently, understandingly, but they _laughed_.

And then they turned away.

"Talk to them," Parker urged.

"How?" Beads of perspiration shone on Captain Wiley’s face.

"Any way. Go ahead."

Captain Wiley wiped his forehead. "We are from Earth, the third
planet...."

The two god-like men seemed annoyed. They walked away, ignoring the
Earthmen.

Captain Wiley spat. "All right, so they won’t talk to us. Look at that
city! Think of the things we can see there and tell the folks on Earth
about! Why, we’ll be heroes!"

"Let’s go," said Parker, his voice quavering around the edges.

They walked toward a large, oval opening in a side of the field, a hole
between mountainous, conical structures that seemed like the entrance to
a street.

Suddenly breath exploded from Captain Wiley’s lungs. His body jerked
back. He fell to the blue stone pavement.

Then he scrambled erect, scowling, his hands outstretched. He felt a
soft, rubbery, invisible substance.

"It’s a wall!" he exclaimed.

The voice droned:

"To those of Earth: Beings under the 4th stage of Galactic Development
are restricted to the area of the landing field. We are sorry. In your
primitive stage it would be unwise for you to learn the nature of our
civilization. Knowledge of our science would be abused by your people,
and used for the thing you call war. We hope that you have been inspired
by what you have seen. However, neither we nor the other visitors to our
planet are permitted to hold contact with you. It is suggested that you
and your vessel depart."

"Listen, you!" screamed Parker. "We’ve been nine years getting here! By
Heaven, we won’t leave now! We’re...."

"We have no time to discuss the matter. Beings under the 4th stage of
Galactic...."

"Never mind!" spat Captain Wiley.

Madness flamed in Parker’s eyes. "We won’t go! I tell you, we _won’t_,
we _won’t_!"

His fists streaked through the air as if at an invisible enemy. He ran
toward the wall.

He collided with a jolt that sent him staggering backward, crying,
sobbing, screaming, all at once.

Captain Wiley stepped forward, struck him on the chin. Parker crumpled.

They stood looking at his body, which lay motionless except for the slow
rising and falling of his chest.

"What now, Captain?" asked Lieutenant Gunderson.

Captain Wiley thought for a few seconds.

Then he said, "We’re ignorant country bumpkins, Lieutenant, riding into
the city in a chugging jalopy. We’re stupid savages, trying to discuss
the making of fire with the creators of atomic energy. We’re children
racing a paper glider against an atomic-powered jet. We’re too
ridiculous to be noticed. We’re tolerated—but nothing more."

"Shall we go home?" asked Fong, a weariness in his voice.

Lieutenant Gunderson scratched his neck. "I don’t think I’d want to go
home now. Could you bear to tell the truth about what happened?"

Fong looked wistfully at the shining city. "If we told the truth, they
probably wouldn’t believe us. We’ve failed. It sounds crazy. We reached
Proxima Centauri and found life, and yet somehow we failed. No, I
wouldn’t like to go home."

"Still, we learned something," said Doyle. "We know now that there is
life on worlds beside our own. Somewhere there must be other races like
ours."

They looked at each other, strangely, for a long, long moment.

At last Lieutenant Gunderson asked, "How far is Alpha Centauri?"

Captain Wiley frowned. "_Alpha_ Centauri?" Through his mind swirled
chaotic visions of colossal distances, eternal night, and lonely years.
He sought hard to find a seed of hope in his mind, and yet there was no
seed. There were only a coldness and an emptiness.

Suddenly, the voice:

"Yes, Men of Earth, we suggest that you try Alpha Centauri."

The men stood silent and numb, like bewildered children, as the
implication of those incredible words sifted into their consciousness.

Finally Fong said, "Did—did you hear that? He said..."

Captain Sam Wiley nodded, very slowly. "Yes. Alpha Centauri. _Alpha_
Centauri."

His eyes began to twinkle, and then he smiled....

                                  ————

Onward sped the _Wanderer_, onward through cold, silent infinity, on and
on, an insignificant pencil of silver lost in the terrible, brooding
blackness.

Yet even greater than the blackness was the flaming hope in the six men
who inhabited the silver rocket. They moved in hope as fish move in
water. Their lives revolved in hope as planets revolve in space and
time. They bore their hope like a jeweled crown, and it was as much a
part of them as sight in their eyes. Hope was both their brother and
their god.

And there was no loneliness.

THE END

_Transcribers note_: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
July 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.





*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LONELY ONES ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/38302

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this
eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and
given away – you may do practically _anything_ with public domain
eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially
commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you
paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this
agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you
paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See
paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in
the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works
by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms
of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated
with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.

*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg™ work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning the
copyright status of any work in any country outside the United States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on
which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed,
viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with
the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work,
you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless
you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided
that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
    already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
    the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
    donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
    days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
    required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
    should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
    “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
    Archive Foundation.”

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
    You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
    works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
    all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the
owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES – Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability
to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE
THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF
WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR
UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT,
INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE
NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND – If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY – You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals
and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely
available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn
more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how
your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with
the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
