                                THE HERO


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.

Title: The Hero

Author: Elaine Wilber

Release Date: April 04, 2011 [EBook #35770]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HERO ***




Produced by Frank van Drogen, Greg Weeks, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.







    THE HERO

    BY ELAINE WILBER

    _Willy was undoubtedly a hero. The difficulty lies in deciding
    which side he was on...._


[Illustration: __Illustrated by Paul Orban__]


Two months after the landing, Ship UXB-69311 was rigged out with most
things needed to make life bearable, if not interesting, for the crew.
Perched on the manicured, blue-green sod of the planet Engraham, its
inner parts were transformed and refitted for the many months of the
Exploration. No effort and no flight of imagination had been spared to
make the ship resemble more a country club than a barracks. With the
permission of Colonel Mondrain, the crew’s bunkroom had been completely
rearranged, and a segment thereof made into a quietly elegant bar. Plans
for this eventual rejuvenation had been fomenting throughout the very
tiresome and very monotonous journey.

When they first landed, the natives fled, and thus it was easy to
liberate furnishings from the adjacent village. When the inhabitants
returned, after the purposes of the visiting Earthman were acknowledged
to be harmless, they proved to be too courteous to carp about a few
missing articles.

The chairs, of a very advanced design and most comfortable, were made of
a light and durable metal alloy thus far unknown to Earth. The bar
(which was probably not its purpose on Engraham, no one knew or cared
what its function had been) was of a design so futuristic that it would
have turned a modern artist mad. The utensils, also liberated, were
unbelievably delicate, yet strong and easy to wash. At first, since the
Earth had not intended the Exploration to resemble the type that
Texas-stationed servicemen like to run in Matamoros, there was nothing
to drink in the utensils. But hardly six weeks had passed before the
first hero of the Exploration, a man named O’Connors, discovered a
palatable fruit growing on nearby bushes. By means of a system of
improvised pipes (also liberated) it was no time at all before tasty
beverages, somewhat strident but quite effective, were being run off and
consumed in quantities. The machine known as O’Connors Joy-Juicer was
concealed behind the bar, and all that was ever seen on the bar when
Colonel Mondrain or the Doctors were around was an innocuous fruit
juice.

The Earth Command had stocked the ship with reading material, most of it
of a disgustingly educational nature, in photostatic cards: and the
second hero of the Exploration was a man named Kosalowsky, who
discovered in the psychology sections the works of Freud and
Krafft-Ebing. After this discovery, a few interesting discussions arose.

After these changes had been made, there was very little to do.

The Earth Command had assumed that the natives of Engraham would resent
the Explorations (most planets did), and so had sent along the crew of
thirty men for protection. All had labored mightily to become part of
this special crew, chosen for endurance and known war-like qualities.
For once they got back to Earth, all were slated to be mustered out of
service immediately, decorated to the ears, and awarded full, life-time
pensions. Many already had contracts to appear on television and one
man, Blunt, hinted at a long term Hollywood contract.

But once they got there, there was little to do after all. A guard was
posted; instruments were checked; and, although the necessity seemed
slight, the ship was kept primed for instantaneous emergency take-off.
On the day corresponding to Earth’s Saturday, the ship was G. I.’d from
stem to stern. The maintenance crew made sure that no parts deteriorated
or got liberated by enterprising natives. But the natives were not an
inventive race. It was discovered by the Doctors (Anker, Frank, Pelham
and Flandeau) that the natives literally did not know how to steal. They
were backward. Dr. Flandeau, who was making great strides with the
language, reported that there was some evidence that the Engrahamites
had once possessed this skill, along with murder, mayhem, bad faith, and
politics, but had lost it, through a deterioration of the species.

Thus, once the ship had been transformed into a place worthy of human
dwelling, and the beverage question had been solved, and utter,
imbecilic boredom circumvented by the timely discoveries of Freud and
Krafft-Ebing, the men found time hanging heavily on their hands; and the
more the doctors discovered about the Engrahamites, the more dismal the
situation became. The doctors, growing more and more fascinated by their
tasks, left the ship bright and early each day, returning around
nightfall to reduce their growing stacks of data to points of Earthly
relevance. The Colonel was also out most of the time. He paid many
social calls on the natives, who, being courteous, received him, and was
often returned at night in a chauffeured native Hop-Hop. Life in the
bunkroom became a sullen round of poker, reading of Krafft-Ebing, and
gab: and Earth currency changed hands daily in the never-ending crap
game.

For there was one great lack in their lives. This lack, and the
inability to do anything about it, absorbed many hours of conversation.
At first, complaints only occurred at intervals; but as weeks passed,
the lamentations became so fervent, so constant, and so heart-rending,
that Dr. Flandeau observed to Dr. Frank that more stirring passages had
not been made since the Jeremiad. For Dr. Flandeau, although aging, was
in his off hours a poet, and a Frenchman always.

Dr. Frank said, "Yes, well, poor bastards."

At first, nostalgically, the crew harked back to happier times on Earth.
Soon not one young lady of their collective acquaintance had escaped the
most minute analysis. They were young men—the oldest, Blunt, was only
twenty-six—and several of them had married young, greatly limiting their
activities so that even their cumulative memories could not last
forever. After several weeks, repetition began to set in. Once all
successes had been lovingly remembered, down to the last, exquisite
detail, they began recalling their failures. The master strategist, the
unofficial referee of these seminars, was Dick Blunt.

"Now where you went wrong there," he would tell a fledgling reporting
complete zero with a YWCA resident, "was in making her feel that you
were interested. Your line with a girl like that should be one of
charity. Pure charity. You impress on her that you’re doing her a
terrific favor. You offer to bring to her dull life romance, adventure,
tenderness."

"I couldn’t even get my hands on her," complained the reproved failure,
Herbert Banks.

"I’ve always found that type the easiest ones of all," Blunt said
indifferently. "Dull, of course."

The testiness, the self-pity, the shortness of temper and the near-riots
over stolen packages of cigarettes, were not improved after the Doctors,
having surveyed the situation thoroughly, decided that it would do no
harm to let the men of the crew go out on Liberty.

Fraternizing with natives was, of course, strictly forbidden. They were
not to drink off premises. (Nor on, for that matter.) They were exhorted
not to steal, not to engage in fights.

Still, they could walk around, take pictures of the strange pink houses
and the dazzling cities. They could watch a covey of children swim in
the municipal pools. They could look at the fountains, the so-called
"miraculous fountains of Engraham", or climb the strange, glassy
mountains. The natives, although shy of them, were most polite, and some
smiled enchantingly—especially the women.

                                  ————

This was the worst rub of all: there were women, and they were gorgeous.
A little smaller than most Earth women, with bright eyes, and high,
arched eyebrows, looking forever as if they had heard the most priceless
joke. Their faces conformed to the most rigid standards of Caucasian
beauty. Their legs, so delicate, so tapering, so fantastically small of
ankle, were breath-taking. Their clothes, which would have driven a
Parisian designer to suicide, were draped carelessly over the most
exquisite figures. True, they were a little deficient in one department,
and this was explained, before they were granted liberty, by Dr.
Flandeau. The women of Engraham, he said, did not bear children.

This announcement was not received with special gloom, for until then,
none of the crew had seen an Engrahamite woman. But Willy Lanham, a
dark-haired, skinny boy from Tennessee, asked, unhappily, "Don’t they
even go in for games or nothin’?"

Flandeau understood instantly. He shook his head sadly. "I should think
not. It has been a long time since they have observed the normal
functions. The women are mainly for decoration, although it is said that
some are also created for brains. They are a most strange people."

After this—granted these agonizing liberties, and able to see that which
was biologically unattainable—the crew became so demoralized that not
even Kosalowsky’s discovery of the works of Wilhelm Reik relieved the
deep gloom.

However, they had reckoned without the superior genius of Dick Blunt.
Blunt received Flandeau’s news as unhappily as the others, and, like the
rest, was made miserable by the sight of the glorious damozels. But he
was a reasonable man and he put his reasoning powers to work. Soon he
alone was cheerful. He went around with the absorbed, other-world look
of a physicist grappling with a problem in ionospheric mathematics
without the use of an IBM calculator. One day he went on Liberty alone.
He did not return until the fall of night, and when he came in his
elation was so immoderate that the others thought there must be bars on
Engraham after all.

"I have found the answer to our question," he said.

No one needed to ask what question. O’Connors hurried to pour Blunt a
drink.

"I have spent the day pursuing this answer logically," said Blunt. "I
have done what any thoughtful man would do. I have read up on it."

"How?" cried Henderson.

"At the library."

Blunt then described his day: finding his way to the library by means of
pantomime; and finding at last, that file of photographs—photographs of
an utterly self-explanatory nature. And these he pulled from his pocket,
for ignoring all discipline, he had stolen them.

The pictures passed from hand to hand. O’Connors passed them on to Pane,
and suddenly felt the need to open the window behind him. It was Willy
Lanham, the boy from Tennessee, who voiced those exultant words that
rose to the throats of all:

He said, "Hey! They’re made just like the Earth girls."

The conversation, at this intensely interesting point, was cut short by
the arrival of the Colonel. He alighted from the native Hop-Hop—waved
cheerily to its driver, and began coming up. The bottle and glasses
vanished, and Kosalowsky began to read aloud from a book especially
reserved for these occasions. The men maintained looks of studious
interest as the officer went through. He went up the ladder to his own
quarters, there to write in his growing volume, THE COMING OCCUPATION
AND GOVERNMENT OF ENGRAHAM. They listened until his door clicked.

The conversation was resumed in more subdued tones.

"Do you think," said Pane shakily, "They still _could_?"

"Not a question of it," Blunt said. "These pictures prove it. It’s what
you might call a lost art. Once upon a time, as with all the fortunate
parts of the galaxy, this art was known to the Engrahamites. Through
some terrific foul-up, they lost it. Probably a combination of the
science of incubation, and the reign of some ghastly square, like Queen
Victoria. Thus were the girls of Engraham deprived of the pleasures of
love."

"The men, too," said Willy. All glared at him reproachfully. To care
about the happiness of the Engrahamite men was thought not quite
patriotic.

"Gradually," Blunt went on, "they must have begun to lose interest.
Probably there was some taboo. In the end they probably all thought, oh,
to hell with it, and began serving on committees."

A long sigh went up.

"It is for us," Blunt said softly, treasuring each word, "to restore
these unhappy maidens to their original human rights.

"But it isn’t going to be easy," Blunt went on. His voice dropped even
lower. "Think what would happen if it went sour. Those Doctors would get
wind of it. We’d be stuck in the Ship for the rest of the Exploration."

There was a sober pause. Finally Banks cleared his throat and said,
"Well, how do you think it should be handled, Blunt?"

"Well, every beachhead needs an invasion," Blunt said, casually holding
out his glass. O’Connors leapt to fill it. "One guy has got to lay the
groundwork. Let him enlighten one quail. Explain things to her." He took
a long, leisurely drink, and sighed. "This quail will rush around
telling the others. Pretty soon there’ll be so many hanging around the
ship that—"

There was a general rush for cooling beverages.

"Right," someone said, when the faculty of speech was recovered.

"And necessarily," said Blunt, "this has to be the guy with the most
savvy. The one who knows the score. The one most likely to succeed.
Check?"

All knew what this was leading up to. Martin said unhappily, "Check,
Blunt, You’re our boy."

                                  ————

Blunt was scheduled to stand guard the next day, but Willy Lanham, eager
to assist the cause, volunteered to take over for him. The hours seemed
to creep by. His air was swaggering and cool when he returned, and all
gathered round with eager curiosity—all but Lanham, who had not
recovered from standing guard.

Blunt sauntered to the bar, accepted a drink, sipped it, lighted a
cigarette, and took a long, pensive drag. Finally he said reminiscently,
"What a doll!"

Pane, never a subtle man, cried in anguish, "Well, how’d you make out?"

Blunt smiled smugly. He began his recital. He was walking along the
street and he met this gorgeous creature. A full description followed
(broken by the arrival of the Colonel and two paragraphs of the DECLINE
AND FALL) making it clear that this was the dish of dishes, the most
beautiful of the beautiful, the most charming, and the most intelligent.
She allowed herself to be addressed in Blunt’s few words of Engrahamic
and, smiling ever patiently, sat with him for several hours. Their talk
took place in a secluded bower, in one of the many parks. She was
agreeable and charmed and promised to see him again. He even managed,
through terrific feats of pantomime, to impress on her the need of
secrecy in future meetings.

"That was all?" someone said, when he finished.

"For the first meeting, I think I did wonders," said Blunt. "After all,
sex hasn’t been known here since a time corresponding to our Stone Age."

Later, when the nightly poker game was beginning, Willy Lanham said,
"Why didn’t you just make a grab for her?"

"That’s the hill-billy approach," Blunt said disdainfully. "These girls
are civilized—very, very civilized. It’s important not to shock them."

                                  ————

Blunt’s next gambit was to set about learning the language. For this he
went not to Flandeau, who best knew it, but to Ankers, who was a pure
scientist in every sense of the word, and not so likely to suspect his
motives. The girl proved very cultured. She took him to art galleries,
to symphonies, and mountain climbing, for scrambling up and down the
glassy hills was a favorite Engrahamic sport. As he advanced in the
language, he learned that her name was Catataphinaria, which meant "she
will attain relative wisdom". He found that she worked for the Eleven
who, while not rulers, offered general suggestions which the populace
more or less followed.

Although his slow progress inevitably bored the crew, still, it offered
that one precious ray of hope, and they became so tractable that even
the Doctors noticed it. They laid it to the secret ingredient that Dr.
Frank had introduced into the drinking water.

The summer wore on, becoming hotter each day. By the end of the second
month of his courtship, Blunt began to speak to her of love.

She laughed. She said that she had little curiosity on the subject,
although it was now and then mentioned by the students of antiquity.
Assured that it was pleasurable, she said that she heard that barbarians
also enjoyed murdering people and making them butts of jokes.

Willy Lanham said, "Don’t listen to what a girl _says_. Just make a grab
for her."

This suggestion was laughed to scorn.

Weeks passed, the summer began to wane. Tempers again began to shorten.
Flandeau said to Frank, "The men are worse again."

"Yes, perhaps we should increase the dosage."

The fruits for the Joy-Juicer grew thin on the silvery bushes, and men
ranged far and wide, putting in supplies for the winter.

                                  ————

One night, when Blunt had won at poker, all the men lay in their bunks,
too dispirited to drink, to shoot craps, almost too miserable even for
speech. Blunt again began talking of Catataphinaria. Drowsily Lanham
said, "I think you’re going at it the wrong way, Dick. Try some real
rough stuff. You know—kiss her. She might like it."

Before Blunt could defend his strategy, Kosalowsky sat up in his bunk.
"Yes, for cripes sake," he said, "Move in for the kill. Or shut up about
it. You’re driving us all nuts."

"Would you like to try?" Blunt suggested softly.

"Sure I’ll try," Kosalowsky said. He turned on the light over his bunk.
"Give me a crack at her. I could have managed it weeks ago. All you’ve
done is talk to the quail."

"Yah, Dick, maybe you’re using the wrong approach on this one,"
O’Connors suggested.

"It’s the damn places you take her," Kosalowsky said. "Art galleries.
Anybody ever seduce a girl in an art gallery? Symphonies. Popping around
in her damn Hop-Hop. Can’t you ever get her alone?"

"She lives with ten other girls," Blunt said sulkily. "They’re all home
all the time."

"Well, bring her here, then," Pane suggested. "We’ll all take a powder."

"Where?"

There was no answer. They could not all, by day, desert the ship, and it
was getting too chilly for the crew to hide in adjacent shrubbery. "We
could put up a wall," Pane said suddenly, "between the bunks and the
bar."

"With what?"

"I know," Banks said eagerly, "where there’s a whole pile of stuff. It’s
nice thin metal, just lying there getting rusty."

"I think you’re premature—"

"Premature!" Kosalowsky shouted. "Six months you’ve been chasing this
tomato. You call that premature?"

"Only four by Engrahamic time," Blunt said, insulted.

"Listen," Kosalowsky said, "that wall goes up tomorrow. And you’re
smuggling her in tomorrow night. Or else," he said, glaring at Blunt,
"after that it’s every man for himself. Check?"

Blunt, only slightly seen in the light from Kosalowsky’s bunk, was white
with rage. "All right, guys," he said stonily. "I’ve been trying to do
right by this frail. Nothing abrupt or hillbilly. Nothing to hurt her
delicate feelings or her fine mind. But if this is how you want
it—Okay!"

                                  ————

The next day the wall went up.

Hardly a word was said as it was hammered in place. Once up, the place
was G. I.’d thoroughly. The ash trays were washed, the floor vacuumed,
and the lights adjusted to achieve the most tellingly seductive effect.
Blunt went out at two, thin-lipped and silent.

"The jerk," Kosalowsky said, "I think he’s a lot of hot air. That’s what
_I_ think."

The Colonel came in at nightfall and asked about the wall. They told him
that it was to cut off the recreation section from the sleeping
quarters, for the protection of those who wanted more sleep to prepare
for the grueling winter watches.

"Very good idea men," the Colonel said, and went upstairs to write
another chapter in his book.

At nine the men disappeared into their bunks. O’Connors won the
responsible job of peering through the narrow slit in the wall. Behind
him could be heard the labored breathing of twenty-seven distraught men.
One man snored. "Wake up, you stupid ass," Pane told Lanham. "You’ll
wreck the show."

At last the door opened and Blunt came in—with the girl.

She was breath-taking. She wore, O’Connors reported, a dress cut to
here—and her hair was piled high on her patrician head. Blunt had not
lied. She was even prettier than the usual run of Engraham girls.

"He’s offering her a drink," O’Connors whispered.

"She take it?"

"No—she’s sitting at the bar. He’s having one, though. He’s turning on
the hi-fi."

He did not have to tell them, since all could hear the soft music. They
had selected a program of melodies considered sure-fire.

"He’s talking to her—putting his arm around her waist. Oh-oh. She
knocked it off. She’s laughing, though."

In the silence they all heard her laugh. Several men moved
uncomfortably. "He’s leading her toward the couch—oh-oh—she stopped to
look at the radar screen."

It was the auxiliary radar, not the important one in the control room.
"What’s he doing?"

"Telling her—he’s edging her to the couch again—now she’s asking about
the Bassett Blaster. They’re fooling around with the gun. He’s showing
her how it works—trying to put his hands—!"

This last was lost, for there was a sudden, resounding blast. Their
bunks, the entire ship, trembled.

The meaning was clear to all. They flattened to their bunks, and waited
tensely. They heard a sound, the sound of a foot kicking a body. A hand
scratched tentatively along the wall.

No one moved. "She killed him." O’Connors voice was no more than a
slight whisper. "Lay low—lay low."’

Then a woman’s voice said, in perfect English, "All right, you men. Come
out of there."

The door was found and flung open. Catataphinaria stood in the dim
light—still holding the Blaster. She said again, more sharply, "I said,
Come out of there!"

Clumsily, they came down from their bunks.

"Now," she said, as she had them all against the wall, "call down the
others."

But this was unnecessary, for the Doctors and the Colonel were already
descending the ladder. They turned quite white at the sight of her.
Wordlessly, she indicated that they were to join the others. The Doctors
found it harder to adjust to a purely military sort of emergency. Ankers
asked clearly, "What on earth is this nonsense?"

"No nonsense," the girl said. "Just do as I say. First, surrender all
your papers."

"Our papers?"

"Your research. Your conclusions. Everything."

Henderson said, "I’ll go get it, Ma’am."

"I would also like the Colonel’s amusing work on the coming occupation."

"I know where it is, sir," Martin said swiftly. "I’ll get it."

The Colonel’s expression was stony. He nodded to Martin to get it, and
it occurred to him that the girl was one of those whom he had personally
selected as the most promising for the puppet governments. But when he
asked about her identity, she cut him off without a word.

"Then, may I ask where you learned such flawless English?"

"All of us know English," she said. "It is a very stupid language."

Martin and Henderson returned with the papers. Gingerly they approached
her, handed the papers to her, and darted back to their places in the
line. She placed the stack on the bar, leafed through it, all the while
keeping them covered with the Blaster, and remarked on finishing, "It is
exactly what one would expect barbarians to find interesting."

Flandeau, however, remained a scientist to the last.

"We find ourselves unhappily deceived," he said. "We were certain—that
you were utterly without defenses. We were told that you did not know
_how_ to lie, cheat, dissemble, or fight."

"Only not with each other." she said. "It was, so to speak, a lost art."
She glanced at Blunt. Several men squirmed. "But it is one that we have
regained," she said.

"And what will you do with us?" Flandeau asked.

"We have decided to let you go," she said. "Now that we possess this
weapon,"—she brandished the Blaster—"which we can copy, we think we can
prevent more Explorations. At least this is the opinion of the Eleven.
So I am instructed to let you leave—at once, of course."

"You are most charming," said Flandeau.

"At once," she repeated.

"Yes, of course. Men! Prepare for blastoff!"

                                  ————

The way back was tedious—the floating around, the boredom, the unending
blackness of space—but at least it was going home. After the first weeks
of space-sickness, things returned to near normal, and the Doctors
conferred with the Colonel. It was decided that the best report should
be that Engraham was uninviting, bleak, and of no interest to Earthmen.
The reputations of all were at stake (the doctors found themselves,
stripped of their papers, unable to recollect enough, and the Colonel
desperately feared a court-martial) and the crew was thus advised. All
agreed to keep their mouths shut. Thus their honorable discharges,
medals, and life-time pensions would be safe.

So, with all this decided, and Earth only a few months away, relative
cheerfulness reigned. Only Willy Lanham continued to mope.

"What’s biting you?" Kosalowsky asked, one day as they lay strapped in
adjacent bunks. "Your face is as long as this ship."

"I just feel bad," Willy said. "I can feel bad if I want to, can’t I?"

"What the hell, we’ll soon be home. We can really raise some hell,
then."

"I miss my girl," Willy blurted out.

"You’ll see her pretty soon."

"I mean my girl on Engraham."

It happened that just then several other men, bored with lying still,
were floating past. They gripped the edges of Willy’s bunk.

"You mean you had," Kosalowsky said cunningly, "a girl on Engraham?"

"Sure I did," said Willy defensively. "Didn’t all you guys?"

More and more men joined the knot of bodies around Willy’s bunk. The
atmosphere became distinctly menacing.

"You mean you didn’t?" Willy said. "You mean it wasn’t a gag we were
pulling on Blunt?"

They were silent. One pair of floating hands neared Willy’s throat.

"Honest," he said. "I didn’t think you were that dumb. I thought you
were just letting Blunt make an ass of himself. I thought that—well, it
was so easy. I even told Dick a couple of times. You just had to make a
grab for ’em."

Pane suddenly let out a harsh sound, like the cry of a wounded bull.

"So who was this frail?" Kosalowsky asked heavily.

"Yeah!" echoed the others.

"Well, she was just a frail, I guess," Willy said. "I used to see her
around the ship. On guard duty. I used to see her all the time. What the
hell," he said, "You think I’m dumb or something? Why’d you think I was
willing to stand guard all the time?"


                                 *END*



 _Transcribers note_: This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science
 Fiction February 1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
        that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.







*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HERO ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/35770

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this
eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and
given away – you may do practically _anything_ with public domain
eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially
commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you
paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this
agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you
paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See
paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in
the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works
by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms
of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated
with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.

*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg™ work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning the
copyright status of any work in any country outside the United States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on
which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed,
viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with
the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work,
you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless
you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided
that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
    already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
    the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
    donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
    days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
    required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
    should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
    “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
    Archive Foundation.”

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
    You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
    works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
    all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the
owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES – Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability
to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE
THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF
WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR
UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT,
INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE
NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND – If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY – You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals
and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely
available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn
more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how
your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with
the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
