The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Storm, by Daniel Defoe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Storm
       or, a Collection of the most Remarkable Casualties and
       Disasters which Happen'd in the Late Dreadful Tempest,
       both by Sea and Land

Author: Daniel Defoe

Release Date: March 1, 2013 [EBook #42234]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORM ***




Produced by Steven Gibbs, Eleni Christofaki and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's note.

This book contains variable punctuation, hyphenation, archaic and
inconsistent spelling as well as apparent printer errors which have been
retained as they appear in the original. For the reader's convenience
the table on page 146 was split.

    Mark up: _italics_




    THE STORM: OR, A COLLECTION Of the most Remarkable CASUALTIES AND
    DISASTERS Which happen'd in the Late _Dreadful TEMPEST_, BOTH BY SEA
    and LAND.


    _The Lord hath his way in the Whirlwind, and in the Storm, and the
    Clouds are the dust of his Feet._ Nah. I. 3.

  _LONDON:_

  Printed for _G. Sawbridge_ in _Little Britain_, and Sold by _J. Nutt_
  near _Stationers-Hall_. M DCC IV.




THE PREFACE


_Preaching of Sermons is Speaking to a few of Mankind: Printing of
Books is Talking to the whole World. The Parson Prescribes himself, and
addresses to the particular Auditory with the Appellation of_ My
Brethren; _but he that Prints a Book, ought to Preface it with a_
Noverint Universi, _Know all Men by these Presents_.

_The proper Inference drawn from this remarkable Observation, is, That
tho' he that Preaches from the Pulpit ought to be careful of his Words,
that nothing pass from him but with an especial Sanction of Truth; yet
he that Prints and Publishes to all the World, has a tenfold
Obligation._

_The Sermon is a Sound of Words spoken to the Ear, and prepar'd only for
present Meditation, and extends no farther than the strength of Memory
can convey it; a Book Printed is a Record; remaining in every Man's
Possession, always ready to renew its Acquaintance with his Memory, and
always ready to be produc'd as an Authority or Voucher to any Reports he
makes out of it, and conveys its Contents for Ages to come, to the
Eternity of mortal Time, when the Author is forgotten in his Grave._

_If a Sermon be ill grounded, if the Preacher imposes upon us, he
trespasses on a few; but if a Book Printed obtrudes a Falshood, if a Man
tells a Lye in Print, he abuses Mankind, and imposes upon the whole
World, he causes our Children to tell Lyes after us, and their Children
after them, to the End of the World._

_This Observation I thought good to make by way of Preface, to let the
World know, that when I go about a Work in which I must tell a great
many Stories, which may in their own nature seem incredible, and in
which I must expect a great part of Mankind will question the Sincerity
of the Relator; I did not do it without a particular sence upon me of
the proper Duty of an Historian, and the abundant Duty laid on him to be
very wary what he conveys to Posterity._

_I cannot be so ignorant of my own Intentions, as not to know, that in
many Cases I shall act the Divine, and draw necessary practical
Inferences from the extraordinary Remarkables of this Book, and some
Digressions which I hope may not be altogether useless in this Case._

_And while I pretend to a thing so solemn, I cannot but premise I should
stand convicted of a double Imposture, to forge a Story, and then preach
Repentance to the Reader from a Crime greater than that I would have him
repent of: endeavouring by a Lye to correct the Reader's Vices, and sin
against Truth to bring the Reader off from sinning against Sence._

_Upon this score, tho' the Undertaking be very difficult among such an
infinite variety of Circumstances, to keep, exactly within the bounds of
Truth; yet I have this positive Assurance with me, that in all the
subsequent Relation, if the least Mistake happen, it shall not be mine._

_If I judge right, 'Tis the Duty of an Historian to set every thing in
its own Light, and to convey matter of fact upon its legitimate
Authority, and no other: I mean thus, (for I wou'd be as explicit as I
can) That where a Story is vouch'd to him with sufficient Authority, he
ought to give the World the Special Testimonial of its proper Voucher,
or else he is not just to the Story: and where it comes without such
sufficient Authority, he ought to say so; otherwise he is not just to
himself. In the first Case he injures the History, by leaving it
doubtful where it might be confirm'd past all manner of question; in the
last he injures his own Reputation, by taking upon himself the Risque,
in case it proves a Mistake, of having the World charge him with a
Forgery._

_And indeed, I cannot but own 'tis just, that if I tell a Story in Print
for a Truth which proves otherwise, unless I, at the same time, give
proper Caution to the Reader, by owning the Uncertainty of my Knowledge
in the matter of fact, 'tis I impose upon the World: my Relater is
innocent, and the Lye is my own._

_I make all these preliminary Observations, partly to inform the Reader,
that I have not undertaken this Work without the serious Consideration
of what I owe to Truth, and to Posterity; nor without a Sence of the
extraordinary Variety and Novelty of the Relation._

_I am sensible, that the want of this Caution is the Foundation of that
great Misfortune we have in matters of ancient History; in which the
Impudence, the Ribaldry, the empty Flourishes, the little Regard to
Truth, and the Fondness of telling a strange Story, has dwindled a great
many valuable Pieces of ancient History into meer Romance._

_How are the Lives of some of our most famous Men, nay the Actions of
whole Ages, drowned in Fable? Not that there wanted Pen-men to write,
but that their Writings were continually mixt with such Rhodomontades of
the Authors that Posterity rejected them as fabulous._

_From hence it comes to pass that Matters of Fact are handed down to
Posterity with so little Certainty, that nothing is to be depended upon;
from hence the uncertain Account of Things and Actions in the remoter
Ages of the World, the confounding the Genealogies as well as
Atchievements of_ Belus, Nimrod, _and_ Nimrus, _and their Successors,
the Histories and Originals of_ Saturn, Jupiter, _and the rest of the
Celestial Rabble, who Mankind would have been asham'd to have call'd_
Gods, _had they had the true Account of their dissolute, exorbitant, and
inhumane Lives_.

_From Men we may descend to Action: and this prodigious Looseness of the
Pen has confounded History and Fable from the beginning of both. Thus
the great Flood in_ Deucalion'_s_ Time _is made to pass for the
Universal Deluge: the Ingenuity of_ Dedalus, _who by a Clue of Thread
got out of the_ Egyptian _Maze, which was thought impossible, is grown
into a Fable of making himself a pair of Wings, and flying through the
Air:--the great Drought and violent Heat of Summer, thought to be the
Time when the Great Famine was in_ Samaria, _fabl'd by the Poets and
Historians into the Story of_ Phaeton _borrowing the Chariot of the
Sun, and giving the Horses their Heads, they run so near the Earth as
burnt up all the nearest Parts, and scorch'd the Inhabitants, so that
they have been black in those Parts ever since._

_These, and such like ridiculous Stuff, have been the Effects of the
Pageantry of Historians in former Ages: and I might descend nearer home,
to the Legends of Fabulous History which have swallow'd up the Actions
of our ancient Predecessors, King_ Arthur, _the Gyant_ Gogmagog, _and
the_ Britain, _the Stories of St._ George _and the_ Dragon, Guy _Earl
of_ Warwick, Bevis _of_ Southampton, _and the like_.

_I'll account for better Conduct in the ensuing History: and tho' some
Things here related shall have equal Wonder due to them, Posterity shall
not have equal Occasion to distrust the Verity of the Relation._

_I confess here is room for abundance of Romance, because the Subject
may be safer extended than in any other case, no Story being capable to
be crowded with such Circumstances, but Infinite Power, which is all
along concern'd with us in every Relation, is suppos'd capable of making
true._

_Yet we shall no where so Trespass upon Fact, as to oblige Infinite
Power to the shewing more Miracles than it intended._

_It must be allow'd, That when Nature was put into so much Confusion,
and the Surface of the Earth and Sea felt such extraordinary a Disorder,
innumerable Accidents would fall out that till the like Occasion happen
may never more be seen, and unless a like Occasion had happen'd could
never before be heard of: wherefore the particular Circumstances being
so wonderful, serve but to remember Posterity of the more wonderful
Extreme, which was the immediate Cause._

_The Uses and Application made from this Terrible Doctrine, I leave to
the Men of the Pulpit; only take the freedom to observe, that when
Heaven it self lays down the Doctrine, all Men are summon'd to make
Applications by themselves._

_The main Inference I shall pretend to make or at least venture the
exposing to publick View, in this case, is, the strong Evidence God has
been pleas'd to give in this terrible manner to his own Being, which
Mankind began more than ever to affront and despise: And I cannot but
have so much Charity for the worst of my Fellow-Creatures, that I
believe no Man was so hard'ned against the Sence of his Maker, but he
felt some Shocks of his wicked Confidence from the Convulsions of Nature
at this time._

_I cannot believe any Man so rooted in Atheistical Opinions, as not to
find some Cause to doubt whether he was not in the Wrong, and a little
to apprehend the Possibility of a Supreme Being, when he felt the
terrible Blasts of this Tempest. I cannot doubt but the Atheist's
hard'ned Soul trembl'd a little as well as his House, and he felt some
Nature asking him some little Questions; as these_--Am not I mistaken?
Certainly there is some such thing as a God--What can all this be? What
is the Matter in the World?

_Certainly Atheism is one of the most Irrational Principles in the
World; there is something incongruous in it with the Test of Humane
Policy, because there is a Risque in the Mistake one way, and none
another. If the Christian is mistaken, and it should at last appear that
there is no Future State, God or Devil, Reward or Punishment, where is
the Harm of it? All he has lost is, that he has practis'd a few needless
Mortifications, and took the pains to live a little more like a Man than
he wou'd have done. But if the Atheist is mistaken, he has brought all
the Powers, whose Being he deny'd, upon his Back, has provok'd the
Infinite in the highest manner, and must at last sink under the Anger of
him whose Nature he has always disown'd._

_I would recommend this Thought to any Man to consider of, one Way he
can lose nothing, the other he may be undone. Certainly a wise Man would
never run such an unequal Risque: a Man cannot answer it to Common
Arguments, the Law of Numbers, and the Rules of Proportion are against
him. No Gamester will set at such a Main; no Man will lay such a Wager,
where he may lose, but cannot win._

_There is another unhappy Misfortune in the Mistake too, that it can
never be discover'd till 'tis too late to remedy. He that resolves to
die an Atheist, shuts the Door against being convinc'd in time._

    _If it shou'd so fall out, as who can tell,
    But that there is a God, a Heaven, and Hell,
    Mankind had best consider well for Fear,
    't should be too late when his Mistakes appear._

_I should not pretend to set up for an Instructor in this Case, were not
the Inference so exceeding just; who can but preach where there is such
a Text? when God himself speaks his own Power, he expects we should draw
just Inferences from it, both for our Selves and our Friends._

_If one Man, in an Hundred Years, shall arrive at a Conviction of the
Being of his Maker, 'tis very well worth my While to write it, and to
bear the Character of an impertinent Fellow from all the rest._

_I thought to make some Apology for the Meanness of Stile, and the
Method, which may be a little unusual, of Printing Letters from the
Country in their own Stile._

_For the last I only leave this short Reason with the Reader, the Desire
I had to keep close to the Truth, and hand my Relation with the true
Authorities from whence I receiv'd it; together with some Justice to the
Gentlemen concern'd, who, especially in Cases of Deliverances, are
willing to record the Testimonial of the Mercies they received, and to
set their Hands to the humble Acknowledgement. The Plainness and Honesty
of the Story will plead for the Meanness of the Stile in many of the
Letters, and the Reader cannot want Eyes to see what sort of People some
of them come from._

_Others speak for themselves, and being writ by Men of Letters, as well
as Men of Principles, I have not Arrogance enough to attempt a
Correction either of the Sense or Stile; and if I had gone about it,
should have injur'd both Author and Reader._

_These come dressed in their own Words because I ought not, and those
because I could not mend 'em. I am perswaded, they are all dress'd in
the desirable, though unfashionable Garb of Truth, and I doubt not but
Posterity will read them with Pleasure._

_The Gentlemen, who have taken the Pains to collect and transmit the
Particular Relations here made publick, I hope will have their End
answered in this Essay, conveying hereby to the Ages to come the Memory
of the dreadfulest and most universal Judgment that ever Almighty Power
thought fit to bring upon this Part of the World._

_And as this was the true Native and Original Design of the first
Undertaking, abstracted from any Part of the Printer's Advantage, the
Editor and Undertakers of this Work, having their Ends entirely
answer'd, hereby give their humble Thanks to all those Gentlemen who
have so far approv'd the Sincerity of their Design as to contribute
their Trouble, and help forward by their just Observations, the
otherwise very difficult Undertaking._

_If Posterity will but make the desired Improvement both of the
Collector's Pains, as well as the several Gentlemens Care in furnishing
the Particulars, I dare say they will all acknowledge their End fully
answer'd, and none more readily than_

      The Ages Humble Servant.




THE STORM

CHAPTER I

_Of the Natural Causes and Original of Winds_


Though a System of Exhalation, Dilation, and Extension, things which the
Ancients founded the Doctrine of Winds upon, be not my direct Business;
yet it cannot but be needful to the present Design to Note, that the
Difference in the Opinions of the Ancients, about the Nature and
Original of Winds, is a Leading Step to one Assertion which I have
advanc'd in all that I have said with Relation to Winds, _viz._ That
there seems to be more of God in the whole Appearance, than in any other
Part of Operating Nature.

Nor do I think I need explain my self very far in this Notion: I allow
the high Original of Nature to be the Great Author of all her Actings,
and by the strict Rein of his Providence, is the Continual and Exact
Guide of her Executive Power; but still 'tis plain that in Some of the
Principal Parts of Nature she is Naked to our Eye, Things appear both in
their Causes and Consequences, Demonstration gives its Assistance, and
finishes our further Enquiries: for we never enquire after God in those
Works of Nature which depending upon the Course of Things are plain and
demonstrative; but where we find Nature defective in her Discovery,
where we see Effects but cannot reach their Causes; there 'tis most
just, and Nature her self seems to direct us to it, to end the rational
Enquiry, and resolve it into Speculation: Nature plainly refers us
beyond her Self, to the Mighty Hand of Infinite Power, the Author of
Nature, and Original of all Causes.

Among these Arcana of the Sovereign Oeconomy, the Winds are laid as far
back as any. Those Ancient Men of Genius who rifled Nature by the
Torch-Light of Reason even to her very Nudities, have been run a-ground
in this unknown Channel; the Wind has blown out the Candle of Reason,
and left them all in the Dark.

_Aristotle_, in his Problems, Sect. 23. calls the Wind _Aeris Impulsum_.
_Seneca_ says, _Ventus est Aer Fluens_. The _Stoicks_ held it, _Motum
aut Fluxionem Aeris_. Mr. _Hobs_, Air mov'd in a direct or undulating
Motion. Fournier, _Le Vent et un Movement Agitation de l'Air Causi par
des Exhalations et Vapours_. The Moderns, a Hot and Dry Exhalation
repuls'd by Antiperistasis; _Des Cartes_ defines it, _Venti Nihil sunt
nisi Moti & Dilati Vapores_. And various other Opinions are very
judiciously collected by the Learned Mr. _Bohun_ in his Treatise of the
Origin and Properties of Wind, P. 7. and concludes, '_That no one
Hypothesis, how Comprehensive soever, has yet been able to resolve all
the Incident Phenomena of Winds_. Bohun _of Winds_, P. 9.

This is what I quote them for, and this is all my Argument demands; the
deepest Search into the Region of Cause and Consequence, has found out
just enough to leave the wisest Philosopher in the dark, to bewilder his
Head, and drown his Understanding. You raise a Storm in Nature by the
very Inquiry; and at last, to be rid of you, she confesses the Truth,
and tells you, _It is not in Me, you must go Home and ask my Father_.

Whether then it be the Motion of Air, and what that Air is, _which as
yet is undefin'd_, whether it is a Dilation, a previous Contraction, and
then violent Extension as in Gun-Powder, whether the Motion is Direct,
Circular, or Oblique, whether it be an Exhalation repuls'd by the Middle
Region, and the Antiperistasis of that Part of the Heavens which is set
as a Wall of Brass to bind up the Atmosphere, and keep it within its
proper Compass for the Functions of Respiration, Condensing and
Rarifying, without which Nature would be all in Confusion; whatever are
their efficient Causes, 'tis not much to the immediate Design.

'Tis apparent, that God Almighty, whom the Philosophers care as little
as possible to have any thing to do with, seems to have reserv'd this,
as one of those Secrets in Nature which should more directly guide them
to himself.

Not but that a Philosopher may be a Christian, and some of the best of
the Latter have been the best of the Former, as _Vossius_, Mr. _Boyle_,
Sir _Walter Raleigh_, Lord _Verulam_, Dr. _Harvey_, and others; and I
wish I could say Mr. _Hobbs_, for 'twas Pity there should lie any just
Exceptions to the Piety of a Man, who had so few to his General
Knowledge, and an exalted Spirit in Philosophy.

When therefore I say the Philosophers do not care to concern God himself
in the Search after Natural Knowledge; I mean, as it concerns Natural
Knowledge, _meerly as such_; for 'tis a Natural Cause they seek, from a
General Maxim, That all Nature has its Cause within it self: 'tis true,
'tis the Darkest Part of the Search, to trace the Chain backward; to
begin at the Consequence, and from thence _hunt Counter_, as we may call
it, to find out the Cause: 'twould be much easier if we could begin at
the Cause, and trace it to all its Consequences.

I make no Question, the Search would be equally to the Advantage of
Science, and the Improvement of the World; for without Doubt there are
some Consequences of known Causes which are not yet discover'd, and I am
as ready to believe there are yet in Nature some _Terra Incognita_ both
as to Cause and Consequence too.

In this Search after Causes, the Philosopher, tho' he may at the same
Time be a very good Christian, cares not at all to meddle with his
Maker: the Reason is plain; We may at any time resolve all things into
Infinite Power, and we do allow that the Finger of Infinite is the First
Mighty Cause of Nature her self: but the Treasury of Immediate Cause is
generally committed to Nature; and if at any Time we are driven to look
beyond her, 'tis because we are out of the way: 'tis not because it is
not in her, but because we cannot find it.

Two Men met in the Middle of a great Wood; One was searching for a Plant
which grew in the Wood, the Other had lost himself in the Wood, and
wanted to get out: The Latter rejoyc'd when thro' the Trees he saw the
open Country: but the Other Man's Business was not to get out, but to
find what he look'd for: yet this Man no more undervalued the
Pleasantness of the Champion Country than the other.

Thus in Nature the Philosopher's Business is not to look through Nature,
and come to the vast open Field of Infinite Power; his Business is in
the Wood; there grows the Plant he looks for; and 'tis there he must
find it. Philosophy's a-ground if it is forc'd to any further Enquiry.
The Christian begins just where the Philosopher ends; and when the
Enquirer turns his Eyes up to Heaven, Farewel Philosopher; 'tis a Sign
he can make nothing of it here.

_David_ was a good Man, the Scripture gives him that Testimony; but I am
of the Opinion, he was a better King than a Scholar, more a Saint than a
Philosopher: and it seems very proper to judge that _David_ was upon the
Search of Natural Causes, and found himself puzzled as to the Enquiry,
when he finishes the Enquiry with two pious Ejaculations, _When I view
the Heavens the Works of thy Hands, the Moon and the Stars which thou
hast made; then I say, what is Man_! _David_ may very rationally be
suppos'd to be searching the Causes, Motions, and Influences of Heavenly
Bodies; and finding his Philosophy a-ground, and the Discovery not to
answer his Search, he turns it all to a pious Use, recognizes Infinite
Power, and applies it to the Exstasies and Raptures of his Soul, which
were always employ'd in the Charm of exalted Praise.

Thus in another Place we find him dissecting the Womb of his Mother, and
deep in the Study of Anatomy; but having, as it may be well supposed, no
Help from _Johan Remelini_, or of the Learned _Riolanus_, and other
Anatomists, famous for the most exquisite Discovery of human Body, and
all the Vessels of Life, with their proper Dimensions and Use, all
_David_ could say to the Matter was, _Good Man_, to look up to Heaven,
and admire what he could not understand, _Psal.--I was fearfully and
wonderfully made_, &c.

This is very Good, and well becomes a Pulpit; but what's all this to a
Philosopher? 'Tis not enough for him to know that God has made the
Heavens, the Moon, and the Stars, but must inform himself where he has
plac'd them, and why there; and what their Business, what their
Influences, their Functions, and the End of their Being. 'Tis not enough
for an Anatomist to know that he is fearfully and wonderfully made in
the lowermost Part of the Earth, but he must see those lowermost Parts;
search into the Method Nature proceeds upon in the performing the Office
appointed, must search the Steps she takes, the Tools she works by; and
in short, know all that the God of Nature has permitted to be capable of
Demonstration.

And it seems a just Authority for our Search, that some things are so
plac'd in Nature by a Chain of Causes and Effects, that upon a diligent
Search we may find out what we look for: To search after what God has in
his Sovereignty thought fit to conceal, may be criminal, and doubtless
is so; and the Fruitlesness of the Enquiry is generally Part of the
Punishment to a vain Curiosity: but to search after what our Maker has
not hid, only cover'd with a thin Veil of Natural Obscurity, and which
upon our Search is plain to be read, seems to be justified by the very
Nature of the thing, and the Possibility of the Demonstration is an
Argument to prove the Lawfulness of the Enquiry.

The Design of this Digression, is, in short, That as where Nature is
plain to be search'd into, and Demonstration easy, the Philosopher is
allow'd to seek for it; so where God has, as it were, laid his Hand upon
any Place, and Nature presents us with an universal Blank, we are
therein led as naturally to recognize the Infinite Wisdom and Power of
the God of Nature, as _David_ was in the Texts before quoted.

And this is the Case here; the Winds are some of those Inscrutables of
Nature, in which humane Search has not yet been able to arrive at any
Demonstration.

'The Winds,' _says the Learned Mr._ Bohun, 'are generated in the
Intermediate Space between the Earth and the Clouds, either by
Rarefaction or Repletion, and sometimes haply by pressure of Clouds,
Elastical Virtue of the Air, &c. from the Earth or Seas, as by Submarine
or Subterraneal Eruption or Descension or Resilition from the middle
Region.'

All this, though no Man is more capable of the Enquiry than this
Gentleman, yet to the Demonstration of the thing, amounts to no more
than what we had before, and still leaves it as Abstruse and Cloudy to
our Understanding as ever.

Not but that I think my self bound in Duty to Science in General, to pay
a just Debt to the Excellency of Philosophical Study, in which I am a
meer Junior, and hardly any more than an Admirer; and therefore I cannot
but allow that the Demonstrations made of Rarefaction and Dilatation are
extraordinary; and that by Fire and Water Wind may be rais'd in a close
Room, as the Lord _Verulam_ made Experiment in the Case of his Feathers.

But that therefore all the Causes of Wind are from the Influences of the
Sun upon vaporous Matter first Exhal'd, which being Dilated are oblig'd
to possess themselves of more Space than before, and consequently make
the Particles fly before them; this does not seem to be a sufficient
Demonstration of Wind: for this, to my weak Apprehension, would rather
make a Blow like Gun-Powder than a rushing forward; at best this is
indeed a probable Conjecture, but admits not of Demonstration equal to
other Phænomena in Nature.

And this is all I am upon, _viz._ That this Case has not equal Proofs of
the Natural Causes of it that we meet with in other Cases: The Scripture
seems to confirm this, when it says in one Place, _He holds the Wind in
his Hand_; as if he should mean, Other things are left to the Common
Discoveries of Natural Inquiry, but this is a thing he holds in his own
Hand, and has conceal'd it from the Search of the most Diligent and
Piercing Understanding: This is further confirm'd by the Words of our
Saviour, _The Wind blows where it listeth, and thou hearest the Sound
thereof, but knowest not whence it cometh_; 'tis plainly express'd to
signify that the Causes of the Wind are not equally discover'd by
Natural Enquiry as the rest of Nature is.

If I would carry this Matter on, and travel into the Seas, and Mountains
of _America_, where the Mansones, the Trade-Winds, the Sea-Breezes, and
such Winds as we have little Knowledge of, are more common; it would yet
more plainly appear, _That we hear the Sound, but know not from whence
they come._

Nor is the Cause of their Motion parallel to the Surface of the Earth,
a less Mystery than their real Original, or the Difficulty of their
Generation: and though some People have been forward to prove the
Gravity of the Particles must cause the Motion to be oblique; 'tis plain
it must be very little so, or else Navigation would be impracticable,
and in extroardinary Cases where the Pressure above is perpendicular, it
has been fatal to Ships, Houses, _&c._ and would have terrible Effects
in the World, if it should more frequently be so.

From this I draw only this Conclusion, That the Winds are a Part of the
Works of God by Nature, in which he has been pleased to communicate less
of Demonstration to us than in other Cases; that the Particulars more
directly lead us to Speculations, and refer us to Infinite Power more
than the other Parts of Nature does.

That the Wind is more expressive and adapted to his Immediate Power, as
he is pleas'd to exert it in extraordinary Cases in the World.

That 'tis more frequently made use of as the Executioner of his
Judgments in the World, and extraordinary Events are brought to pass by
it.

From these three Heads we are brought down directly to speak of the
Particular Storm before us; _viz._ The Greatest, the Longest in
Duration, the widest in Extent, of all the Tempests and Storms that
History gives any Account of since the Beginning of Time.

In the further Conduct of the Story, 'twill not be foreign to the
Purpose, nor unprofitable to the Reader, to review the Histories of
ancient Time and remote Countries, and examine in what Manner God has
been pleas'd to execute his Judgments by Storms and Tempests; what kind
of things they have been, and what the Consequences of them; and then
bring down the Parallel to the Dreadful Instance before us.

We read in the Scripture of Two Great Storms; One past, and the Other to
come. Whether the last be not Allegorical rather than Prophetical, I
shall not busie my self to determine.

The First was when God caused a strong Wind to blow upon the Face of the
Delug'd World; to put a stop to the Flood, and reduce the Waters to
their proper Channel.

I wish our Naturalists would explain that Wind to us, and tell us which
way it blew, or how it is possible that any direct Wind could cause the
Waters to ebb; for to me it seems, that the Deluge being universal, that
Wind which blew the Waters from one Part must blow them up in another.

Whether it was not some perpendicular Gusts that might by their Force
separate the Water and the Earth, and cause the Water driven from off
the Land to _subside_ by its own Pressure.

I shall dive no farther into that mysterious Deluge, which has some
things in it which recommend the Story rather to our Faith than
Demonstration.

The Other Storm I find in the Scripture is in the _God shall rain upon
the Wicked, Plagues, Fire, and a horrible Tempest_. What this shall be,
we wait to know; and happy are they who shall be secured from its
Effects.

Histories are full of Instances of violent Tempests and Storms in sundry
particular Places. What that was, which mingled with such violent
Lightnings set the Cities of _Sodom_ and _Gomorrah_ on fire, remains to
me yet undecided: nor am I satisfied the Effect it had on the Waters of
the Lake, which are to this Day call'd the _Dead Sea_, are such as some
fabulous Authors have related, and as Travellers take upon them to say.




CHAPTER II

_Of the Opinion of the Ancients, That this Island was more Subject to
Storms than other Parts of the World_


I am not of Opinion with the early Ages of the World, when these Islands
were first known, that they were the most Terrible of any Part of the
World for Storms and Tempests.

_Cambden_ tells us, The _Britains_ were distinguish'd from all the World
by unpassable Seas and terrible Northern Winds, which made the _Albion_
Shores dreadful to Sailors; and this part of the World was therefore
reckoned the utmost Bounds of the Northern known Land, beyond which none
had ever sailed: and quotes a great variety of ancient Authors to this
purpose; some of which I present as a Specimen.

      _Et Penitus Toto Divisos Orbe Britannos.
    Britain's_ disjoyn'd from all the well known World.
        _Quem Littus adusta,
    Horrescit Lybiæ, ratibusq; Impervia_ [A]Thule
      _Ignotumq; Fretum_.

      Claud.

[A: Taken frequently for _Britain_.]

And if the Notions the World then had were true, it would be very absurd
for us who live here to pretend Miracles in any Extremes of Tempests;
since by what the Poets of those Ages flourish'd about stormy Weather,
was the native and most proper Epithet of the Place:

    _Belluosus qui remotis
    Obstrepit Oceanus_ Britannis.

      _Hor._

Nay, some are for placing the Nativity of the Winds hereabouts, as if
they had been all generated here, and the Confluence of Matter had made
this Island its General Rendezvouz.

But I shall easily show, that there are several Places in the World far
better adapted to be the General Receptacle or Centre of Vapours, to
supply a Fund of Tempestuous Matter, than _England_; as particularly the
vast Lakes of _North America_: Of which afterwards.

And yet I have two Notions, one real, one imaginary, of the Reasons
which gave the Ancients such terrible Apprehensions of this Part of the
World; which of late we find as Habitable and Navigable as any of the
rest.

The real Occasion I suppose thus: That before the Multitude and Industry
of Inhabitants prevail'd to the managing, enclosing, and improving the
Country, the vast Tract of Land in this Island which continually lay
open to the Flux of the Sea, and to the Inundations of Land-Waters, were
as so many standing Lakes; from whence the Sun continually exhaling vast
quantities of moist Vapours, the Air could not but be continually
crowded with all those Parts of necessary Matter to which we ascribe the
Original of Winds, Rains, Storms, and the like.

He that is acquainted with the situation of _England_, and can reflect
on the vast Quantities of flat Grounds, on the Banks of all our
navigable Rivers, and the Shores of the Sea, which Lands at Least lying
under Water every Spring-Tide, and being thereby continually full of
moisture, were like a stagnated standing body of Water brooding Vapours
in the Interval of the Tide, must own that at least a fifteenth part of
the whole Island may come into this Denomination.

Let him that doubts the Truth of this, examine a little the Particulars;
let him stand upon _Shooters-Hill_ in _Kent_, and view the Mouth of the
River _Thames_, and consider what a River it must be when none of the
Marshes on either side were wall'd in from the Sea, and when the Sea
without all question flow'd up to the Foot of the Hills on either Shore,
and up every Creek, where he must allow is now dry Land on either side
the River for two Miles in breadth at least, sometimes three or four,
for above forty Miles on both sides the River.

Let him farther reflect, how all these Parts lay when, as our ancient
Histories relate, the _Danish_ Fleet came up almost to _Hartford_, so
that all that Range of fresh Marshes which reach for twenty five Miles
in length, from _Ware_ to the River _Thames_, must be a Sea.

In short, Let any such considering Person imagine the vast Tract of
Marsh-Lands on both sides the River _Thames_, to _Harwich_ on the
_Essex_ side, and to _Whitstable_ on the _Kentish_ side, the Levels of
Marshes up the _Stour_ from _Sandwich_ to _Canterbury_, the whole Extent
of Lowgrounds commonly call'd _Rumney-Marsh_, from _Hythe_ to
_Winchelsea_, and up the Banks of the _Rother_; all which put together,
and being allow'd to be in one place cover'd with Water, what a Lake
wou'd it be suppos'd to make? According to the nicest Calculations I can
make, it cou'd not amount to less than 500000 Acres of Land.

The Isle of _Ely_, with the _Flats_ up the several Rivers from
_Yarmouth_ to _Norwich_, _Beccles_, &c. the continu'd Levels in the
several Counties of _Norfolk_, _Cambridge_, _Suffolk_, _Huntingdon_,
_Northampton_, and _Lincoln_, I believe do really contain as much Land
as the whole County of _Norfolk_; and 'tis not many Ages since these
Counties were universally one vast Moras or Lough, and the few solid
parts wholly unapproachable: insomuch that the Town of _Ely_ it self was
a Receptacle for the Malecontents of the Nation, where no reasonable
Force cou'd come near to dislodge them.

'Tis needless to reckon up twelve or fourteen like Places in _England_,
as the Moores in _Somersetshire_, the Flat-shores in _Lancashire_,
_Yorkshire_, and _Durham_, the like in _Hampshire_ and _Sussex_; and in
short, on the Banks of every Navigable River.

The sum of the matter is this; That while this Nation was thus full of
standing Lakes, stagnated Waters, and moist Places, the multitude of
Exhalations must furnish the Air with a quantity of Matter for Showers
and Storms infinitely more than it can be now supply'd withal, those
vast Tracts of Land being now fenc'd off, laid dry, and turn'd into
wholsome and profitable Provinces.

This seems demonstrated from _Ireland_, where the multitude of Loughs,
Lakes, Bogs, and moist Places, serve the Air with Exhalations, which
give themselves back again in Showers, and make it be call'd, _The
Piss-pot of the World_.

The imaginary Notion I have to advance on this Head, amounts only to a
Reflection upon the Skill of those Ages in the Art of Navigation; which
being far short of what it is since arrived to, made these vast Northern
Seas too terrible for them to venture in: and accordingly, they rais'd
those Apprehensions up to Fable, which began only in their want of
Judgment.

The _Phoenicians_, who were our first Navigators, the _Genoese_, and
after them the _Portuguese_, who arriv'd to extraordinary Proficiency in
Sea Affairs, were yet all of them, _as we say_, Fair-weather Sea-men:
The chief of their Navigation was Coasting; and if they were driven out
of their Knowledge, had work enough to find their way home, and
sometimes never found it at all; but one Sea convey'd them directly into
the last Ocean, from whence no Navigation cou'd return them.

When these, by Adventures, or Misadventures rather, had at any time
extended their Voyaging as far as this Island, which, by the way, they
always perform'd round the Coast of _Spain_, _Portugal_, and _France_;
if ever such a Vessel return'd, if ever the bold Navigator arriv'd at
home, he had done enough to talk on all his Days, and needed no other
Diversion among his Neighbours, than to give an Account of the vast
Seas, mighty Rocks, deep Gulfs, and prodigious Storms he met with in
these remote Parts of the known World: and this, magnified by the
Poetical Arts of the Learned Men of those times, grew into a receiv'd
Maxim of Navigation, That these Parts were so full of constant Tempests,
Storms, and dangerous Seas, that 'twas present Death to come near them,
and none but Madmen and Desperadoes could have any Business there, since
they were Places where Ships never came, and Navigation was not proper
in the Place.

    And _Thule_, where no Passage was
      For Ships their Sails to bear.

_Horace_ has reference to this horrid Part of the World, as a Place full
of terrible Monsters, and fit only for their Habitation, in the Words
before quoted.

         _Belluosus qui remotis
    Obstrepit Oceanus Britannis._

_Juvenal_ follows his Steps;

    _Quanto Delphino Balæna Britannica major._

      Juv.

Such horrid Apprehensions those Ages had of these Parts, which by our
Experience, and the Prodigy to which Navigation in particular, and
Sciential Knowledge in general, is since grown, appear very ridiculous.

For we find no Danger in our Shores, no uncertain wavering in our Tides,
no frightful Gulfs, no horrid Monsters, but what the bold Mariner has
made familiar to him. The Gulfs which frighted those early Sons of
_Neptune_ are search'd out by our Seamen, and made useful Bays, Roads,
and Harbours of Safety. The Promontories which running out into the Sea
gave them terrible Apprehensions of Danger, are our Safety, and make the
Sailors Hearts glad, as they are the first Lands they make when they are
coming Home from a long Voyage, or as they are a good shelter when in a
Storm our Ships get _under their Lee_.

Our Shores are sounded, the Sands and Flats are discovered, which they
knew little or nothing of, and in which more real Danger lies, than in
all the frightful Stories they told us; useful Sea-marks and
Land-figures are plac'd on the Shore, Buoys on the Water, Light-houses
on the highest Rocks; and all these dreadful Parts of the World are
become the Seat of Trade, and the Centre of Navigation: Art has
reconcil'd all the Difficulties, and Use made all the _Horribles_ and
_Terribles_ of those Ages become as natural and familiar as Day-light.

The Hidden Sands, almost the only real Dread of a Sailor, and by which
till the Channels between them were found out, our Eastern Coast must be
really unpassable, now serve to make Harbours: and _Yarmouth_ Road was
made a safe Place for Shipping by them. Nay, when _Portsmouth_,
_Plymouth_, and other good Harbours would not defend our Ships in the
Violent Tempest we are treating of, here was the least Damage done of
any Place in _England_, considering the Number of Ships which lay at
Anchor, and the Openness of the Place.

So that upon the whole it seems plain to me, that all the dismal things
the Ancients told us of _Britain_, and her terrible Shores, arose from
the Infancy of Marine Knowledge, and the Weakness of the Sailor's
Courage.

Not but that I readily allow we are more subject to bad Weather and hard
Gales of Wind than the Coasts of _Spain_, _Italy_, and _Barbary_. But if
this be allow'd, our Improvement in the Art of Building Ships is so
considerable, our Vessels are so prepar'd to ride out the most violent
Storms, that the Fury of the Sea is the least thing our Sailors fear:
Keep them but from _a Lee Shore_, or touching upon a Sand, they'll
venture all the rest: and nothing is a greater satisfaction to them, if
they have a Storm in view, than a sound Bottom and good _Sea-room_.

From hence it comes to pass, that such Winds as in those Days wou'd have
pass'd for Storms, are called only a _Fresh-gale_, or _Blowing hard_. If
it blows enough to fright a South Country Sailor, we laugh at it: and if
our Sailors bald Terms were set down in a Table of Degrees, it will
explain what we mean.

    _Stark Calm._    | _A Top-sail Gale._
    _Calm Weather._  | _Blows fresh._
    _Little Wind._   | _A hard Gale of Wind._
    _A fine Breeze._ | _A Fret of Wind._
    _A small Gale._  | _A Storm._
    _A fresh Gale._  | _A Tempest._

Just half these Tarpawlin Articles, I presume, would have pass'd in
those Days for a Storm; and that our Sailors call a Top-sail Gale would
have drove the Navigators of those Ages into Harbours: when our Sailors
reef a Top-sail, they would have handed all their Sails; and when we go
under a main Course, they would have run _afore it_ for Life to the next
Port they could make: when our _Hard Gale_ blows, they would have cried
a Tempest; and about the _Fret of Wind_ they would be all at their
Prayers.

And if we should reckon by this Account we are a stormy Country indeed,
our Seas are no more Navigable now for such Sailors than they were then:
If the _Japoneses_, the _East Indians_, and such like Navigators, were
to come with their thin Cockleshell Barks and Calico Sails; if
_Cleopatra's_ Fleet, or _Cæsar's_ great Ships with which he fought the
Battle of _Actium_, were to come upon our Seas, there hardly comes a
_March_ or a _September_ in twenty Years but would blow them to Pieces,
and then the poor Remnant that got Home, would go and talk of a terrible
Country where there's nothing but Storms and Tempests; when all the
Matter is, the Weakness of their Shipping, and the Ignorance of their
Sea-men: and I make no question but our Ships ride out many a worse
Storm than that terrible Tempest which scatter'd _Julius Cæsar's_ Fleet,
or the same that drove _Æneas_ on the Coast of _Carthage_.

And in more modern times we have a famous Instance in the _Spanish
Armada_; which, after it was rather frighted than damag'd by Sir
_Francis Drake_'s Machines, not then known by the Name of Fireships,
were scatter'd by a terrible Storm, and lost upon every Shore.

The Case is plain, 'Twas all owing to the Accident of Navigation: They
had, no doubt, a hard Gale of Wind, and perhaps a Storm; but they were
also on an Enemy's Coast, their Pilots out of their Knowledge, no
Harbour to run into, and an Enemy a-stern, that when once they
separated, Fear drove them from one Danger to another, and away they
went to the Northward, where they had nothing but God's Mercy, and the
Winds and Seas to help them. In all those Storms and Distresses which
ruin'd that Fleet, we do not find an Account of the Loss of one Ship,
either of the _English_ or _Dutch_; the Queen's Fleet rode it out in the
_Downs_, which all Men know is none of the best Roads in the World; and
the _Dutch_ rode among the Flats of the _Flemish_ Coast, while the vast
Galleons, not so well fitted for the Weather, were forc'd to keep the
Sea, and were driven to and fro till they had got out of their
Knowledge; and like Men desperate, embrac'd every Danger they came near.

This long Digression I could not but think needful, in order to clear up
the Case, having never met with any thing on this Head before: At the
same time 'tis allow'd, and Histories are full of the Particulars, that
we have often very high Winds, and sometimes violent Tempests in these
Northen Parts of the World; but I am still of opinion, such a Tempest
never happen'd before as that which is the Subject of these Sheets: and
I refer the Reader to the Particulars.




CHAPTER III

_Of the Storm in General_


Before we come to examine the Damage suffer'd by this terrible Night,
and give a particular Relation of its dismal Effects; 'tis necessary to
give a summary Account of the thing it self, with all its affrightning
Circumstances.

It had blown exceeding hard, as I have already observ'd, for about
fourteen Days past; and that so hard, that we thought it terrible
Weather: Several Stacks of Chimnies were blown down, and several Ships
were lost, and the Tiles in many Places were blown off from the Houses;
and the nearer it came to the fatal 26_th_ of _November_, the
Tempestuousness of the Weather encreas'd.

On the _Wednesday_ Morning before, being the 24_th_ of _November_, it
was fair Weather, and blew hard; but not so as to give any
Apprehensions, till about 4 a Clock in the Afternoon the Wind encreased,
and with Squauls of Rain and terrible Gusts blew very furiously.

The Collector of these Sheets narrowly escap'd the Mischief of a Part of
a House, which fell on the Evening of that Day by the Violence of the
Wind; and abundance of Tiles were blown off the Houses that Night: the
Wind continued with unusual Violence all the next Day and Night; and had
not the Great Storm follow'd so soon, this had pass'd for a great Wind.

On _Friday_ Morning it continued to blow exceeding hard, but not so as
that it gave any Apprehensions of Danger within Doors; towards Night it
encreased: and about 10 a Clock, our Barometers inform'd us that the
Night would be very tempestuous; the _Mercury_ sunk lower than ever I
had observ'd it on any Occasion whatsoever, which made me suppose the
Tube had been handled and disturb'd by the Children.

But as my Observations of this Nature are not regular enough to supply
the Reader with a full Information, the Disorders of that dreadful Night
having found me other Imployment, expecting every Moment when the House
I was in would bury us all in its own Ruins; I have therefore subjoin'd
a Letter from an Ingenious Gentleman on this very Head, directed to the
_Royal Society_, and printed in the _Philosophical Transactions_, No.
289. P. 1530. as follows.

    _A Letter from the Reverend Mr._ William Derham, _F.R.S. Containing
    his Observations concerning the late Storm_.

    _SIR_,

    According to my Promise at the general Meeting of the _R.S._ on St.
    _Andrews_ Day, I here send you inclos'd the Account of my Ingenious
    and Inquisitive Friend _Richard Townely_, Esq; concerning the State
    of the Atmosphere in that Part of _Lancashire_ where he liveth, in
    the late dismal Storm. And I hope it will not be unaccepable, to
    accompany his with my own Observations at _Upminster_; especially
    since I shall not weary you with a long History of the Devastations,
    _&c._ but rather some Particulars of a more Philosophical
    Consideration.

    And first, I do not think it improper to look back to the preceding
    Seasons of the Year. I scarce believe I shall go out of the way, to
    reflect as far back as _April_, _May_, _June_ and _July_; because
    all these were wet Months in our Southern Parts. In _April_ there
    fell 12,49 _l._ of Rain through my Tunnel: And about 6, 7, 8, or 9,
    _l._ I esteem a moderate quantity for _Upminster. In_ May _there
    fell more than in any Month of any Year since the Year 1696_, viz.
    20,77 _l. June_ likewise was a dripping Month, in which fell 14,55
    _l._ And _July_, although it had considerable Intermissions, yet had
    14,19 _l._ above 11 _l._ of which fell on _July_ 28_th_ and 29_th_
    in violent Showers. And I remember the News Papers gave Accounts of
    great Rains that Month from divers Places of _Europe_; but the
    _North of England_ (which also escaped the Violence of the late
    Storm) was not so remarkably wet in any of those Months; at least
    not in that great proportion more than we, as usually they are; as I
    guess from the Tables of Rain, with which Mr. _Towneley_ hath
    favoured me. Particularly _July_ was a dry Month with them, there
    being no more than 3,65 _l._ of Rain fell through Mr. _Towneley's_
    Tunnel of the same Diameter with mine.

    From these Months let us pass to _September_, and that we shall
    find to have been a wet Month, especially the latter part of it;
    there fell of Rain in that Month, 14,86 _l._

    _October_ and _November_ last, although not remarkably wet, yet have
    been open warm Months for the most part. My Thermometer (whose
    freezing Point is about 84) hath been very seldom below 100 all this
    Winter, and especially in _November_.

    Thus I have laid before you as short Account as I could of the
    preceding Disposition of the Year, particularly as to wet and
    warmth, because I am of opinion that these had a great Influence in
    the late Storm; not only in causing a Repletion of Vapours in the
    Atmosphere, but also in raising such Nitro-sulphureous or other
    heterogeneous matter, which when mix'd together might make a sort of
    Explosion (like fired Gun-powder) in the Atmosphere. And from this
    Explosion I judge those Corruscations or Flashes in the Storm to
    have proceeded, which most People as well as my self observed, and
    which some took for Lightning. But these things I leave to better
    Judgments, such as that very ingenious Member of our Society, who
    hath undertaken the Province of the late Tempest; to whom, if you
    please, you may impart these Papers; Mr. _Halley_ you know I mean.

    From Preliminaries it is time to proceed nearer to the Tempest it
    self. And the foregoing Day, _viz. Thursday, Nov._ 25. I think
    deserveth regard. In the Morning of that day was a little Rain, the
    Winds high in the Afternoon: S.b.E. and S. In the Evening there was
    Lightning; and between 9 and 10 of the Clock at Night, a violent,
    but short Storm of Wind, and much Rain at _Upminster_; and of Hail
    in some other Places, which did some Damage: There fell in that
    Storm 1,65 _l._ of Rain. The next Morning, which was _Friday,
    Novem._ 26. the Wind was S.S.W. and high all Day, and so continued
    till I was in Bed and asleep. About 12 that Night, the Storm
    awaken'd me, which gradually encreas'd till near 3 that Morning; and
    from thence till near 7 it continued in the greatest excess: and
    then began slowly to abate, and the _Mercury_ to rise swiftly. The
    Barometer I found at 12 h. ½ P.M. at 28,72, where it continued till
    about 6 the next Morning, or 6¼, and then hastily rose; so that it
    was gotten to 82 about 8 of the Clock, as in the Table.

    How the Wind sat during the late Storm I cannot positively say, it
    being excessively dark all the while, and my Vane blown down also,
    when I could have seen: But by Information from Millers, and others
    that were forc'd to venture abroad; and by my own guess, I imagin it
    to have blown about S.W. by S. or nearer to the S. in the
    beginning, and to veer about towards the West towards the End of the
    Storm, as far as W.S.W.

    The degrees of the Wind's Strength being not measurable (that I know
    of, though talk'd of) but by guess, I thus determine, with respect
    to other Storms. On _Feb._ 7. 1698/9. was a terrible Storm that did
    much damage. This I number 10 degrees; the Wind then W.N.W. _vid.
    Ph. Tr. No._ 262. Another remarkable Storm was _Feb._ 3. 1701/2. at
    which time was the greatest descent of the ☿ ever known: This I
    number 9 degrees. But this last of _November_, I number at least 15
    degrees.

    As to the _Stations_ of the _Barometer_, you have Mr. _Towneley_'s
    and mine in the following Table to be seen at one View.


    A Table shewing the Height of the _Mercury_ in the Barometer, at
    _Townely_ and _Upminster_, before, in, and after the Storm

    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    |        _Townely._                     _Upminster._       |
    +-------+-------+-------------+-------+------+-------------+
    | Day   |  Hour | Height of ☿ | Day   | Hour | Height of ☿ |
    +-------+-------+-------------+-------+------+-------------+
    | Novr. |  7    |   28 98     | Novr. |  8   |    29 50    |
    | 25    |  3    |      64     |  25   | 12   |       39    |
    |       |  9½   |      61     |       |  9   |       14    |
    +-------+-------+-------------+-------+------+-------------+
    | 26    |  7    |      80     |       |  8   |       33    |
    |       |  3    |      70     |  26   | 12   |       28    |
    |       |       |             |       |  9   |       10    |
    |       |  9⅛   |      47     |       | 12½  |    28 72    |
    +-------+-------+-------------+-------+------+-------------+
    | 27    |  7    |      50     |       |  7½  |       82    |
    |       |  3    |      81     |  27   | 12   |    29 31    |
    |       |  9½   |      95     |       |  9   |       42    |
    +-------+-------+-------------+-------+------+-------------+
    | 28    |  7    |   29 34     |       |  8   |       65    |
    |       |  3    |      62     |  28   | 12   |       83    |
    |       |  9    |      84     |       |  9   |    30 07    |
    +-------+-------+-------------+-------+------+-------------+
    | 29    |  7    |      88     |  29   |  8   |       25    |
    +-------+-------+-------------+-------+------+-------------+

    As to _November_ 17_th_ (whereon Mr. _Towneley_ mentions a violent
    Storm in _Oxfordshire_) it was a Stormy Afternoon here at
    _Upminster_, accompanied with Rain, but not violent, nor ☿ very
    low. _November 11th_ and _12th_ had both higher Winds and more Rain;
    and the ☿ was those Days lower than even in the last Storm of
    _November_ 26_th_.

    Thus, Sir, I have given you the truest Account I can, of what I
    thought most to deserve Observation, both before, and in the late
    Storm. I could have added some other particulars, but that I fear I
    have already made my Letter long, and am tedious. I shall therefore
    only add, that I have Accounts of the Violence of the Storm at
    _Norwich_, _Beccles_, _Sudbury_, _Colchester_, _Rochford_, and
    several other intermediate places; but I need not tell Particulars,
    because I question not but you have better Informations.

      _Thus far Mr._ Derham_'s Letter_.

It did not blow so hard till Twelve a Clock at Night, but that most
Families went to Bed; though many of them not without some Concern at
the terrible Wind, which then blew: But about One, or at least by Two a
Clock, 'tis suppos'd, few People, that were capable of any Sense of
Danger, were so hardy as to lie in Bed. And the Fury of the Tempest
encreased to such a Degree, that as the Editor of this Account being in
_London_, and conversing with the People the next Days, understood, most
People expected the Fall of their Houses.

And yet in this general Apprehension, no body durst quit their tottering
Habitations; for whatever the Danger was within doors, 'twas worse
without; the Bricks, Tiles, and Stones, from the Tops of the Houses,
flew with such force, and so thick in the Streets, that no one thought
fit to venture out, tho' their Houses were near demolish'd within.

The Author of this Relation was in a well-built brick House in the
skirts of the City; and a Stack of Chimneys falling in upon the next
Houses, gave the House such a Shock, that they thought it was just
coming down upon their Heads: but opening the Door to attempt an Escape
into a Garden, the Danger was so apparent, that they all thought fit to
surrender to the Disposal of Almighty Providence, and expect their
Graves in the Ruins of the House, rather than to meet most certain
Destruction in the open Garden: for unless they cou'd have gone above
two hundred Yards from any Building, there had been no Security, for the
Force of the Wind blew the Tiles point-blank, tho' their weight inclines
them downward: and in several very broad Streets, we saw the Windows
broken by the flying of Tile-sherds from the other side: and where there
was room for them to fly, the Author of this has seen Tiles blown from a
House above thirty or forty Yards, and stuck from five to eight Inches
into the solid Earth. Pieces of Timber, Iron, and Sheets of Lead, have
from higher Buildings been blown much farther; as in the Particulars
hereafter will appear.

It is the receiv'd Opinion of abundance of People, that they felt,
during the impetuous fury of the Wind, several Movements of the Earth;
and we have several Letters which affirm it: But as an Earthquake must
have been so general, that every body must have discern'd it; and as the
People were in their Houses when they imagin'd they felt it, the Shaking
and Terror of which might deceive their Imagination, and impose upon
their Judgment; I shall not venture to affirm it was so: And being
resolv'd to use so much Caution in this Relation as to transmit nothing
to Posterity without authentick Vouchers, and such Testimony as no
reasonable Man will dispute; so if any Relation come in our way, which
may afford us a Probability, tho' it may be related for the sake of its
Strangeness or Novelty, it shall nevertheless come in the Company of all
its Uncertainties, and the Reader left to judge of its Truth: for this
Account had not been undertaken, but with design to undeceive the World
in false Relations, and to give an Account back'd with such Authorities,
as that the Credit of it shou'd admit of no Disputes.

For this reason I cannot venture to affirm that there was any such thing
as an Earthquake; but the Concern and Consternation of all People was so
great, that I cannot wonder at their imagining several things which were
not, any more than their enlarging on things that were, since nothing is
more frequent, than for Fear to double every Object, and impose upon the
Understanding, strong Apprehensions being apt very often to perswade us
of the Reality of such things which we have no other reasons to shew for
the probability of, than what are grounded in those Fears which prevail
at that juncture.

Others thought they heard it thunder. 'Tis confess'd, the Wind by its
unusual Violence made such a noise in the Air as had a resemblance to
Thunder; and 'twas observ'd, the roaring had a Voice as much louder than
usual, as the Fury of the Wind was greater than was ever known: the
Noise had also something in it more formidable; it sounded aloft, and
roar'd not very much unlike remote Thunder.

And yet tho' I cannot remember to have heard it thunder, or that I saw
any Lightning, or heard of any that did in or near _London_; yet in the
Counties the Air was seen full of Meteors and vaporous Fires: and in
some places both Thundrings and unusual Flashes of Lightning, to the
great terror of the Inhabitants.

And yet I cannot but observe here, how fearless such People as are
addicted to Wickedness, are both of God's Judgments and uncommon
Prodigies; which is visible in this Particular, That a Gang of hardned
Rogues assaulted a Family at _Poplar_, in the very Height of the Storm,
broke into the House, and robb'd them: it is observable, that the People
cryed Thieves, and after that cryed Fire, in hopes to raise the
Neighbourhood, and to get some Assistance; but such is the Power of
Self-Preservation, and such was the Fear, the Minds of the People were
possess'd with, that no Body would venture out to the Assistance of the
distressed Family, who were rifled and plundered in the middle of all
the Extremity of the Tempest.

It would admit of a large Comment here, and perhaps not very
unprofitable, to examine from what sad Defect in Principle it must be
that Men can be so destitute of all manner of Regard to invisible and
superiour Power, to be acting one of the vilest Parts of a Villain,
while infinite Power was threatning the whole World with Disolation, and
Multitudes of People expected the Last Day was at Hand.

Several Women in the City of _London_ who were in Travail, or who fell
into Travail by the Fright of the Storm, were oblig'd to run the risque
of being delivered with such Help as they had; and Midwives found their
own Lives in such Danger, that few of them thought themselves oblig'd to
shew any Concern for the Lives of others.

Fire was the only Mischief that did not happen to make the Night
compleatly dreadful; and yet that was not so every where, for in
_Norfolk_ the Town of ---- was almost ruin'd by a furious Fire, which
burnt with such Vehemence, and was so fann'd by the Tempest, that the
Inhabitants had no Power to concern themselves in the extinguishing it;
the Wind blew the Flames, together with the Ruines, so about, that there
was no standing near it; for if the People came to Windward they were in
Danger to be blown into the Flames; and if to Leeward the Flames were so
blown up in their Faces, they could not bear to come near it.

If this Disaster had happen'd in _London_, it must have been very fatal;
for as no regular Application could have been made for the extinguishing
it, so the very People in Danger would have had no Opportunity to have
sav'd their Goods, and hardly their Lives: for though a Man will run any
Risque to avoid being burnt, yet it must have been next to a Miracle, if
any Person so oblig'd to escape from the Flames had escap'd being
knock'd on the Head in the Streets; for the Bricks and Tiles flew about
like small Shot; and 'twas a miserable Sight, in the Morning after the
Storm, to see the Streets covered with Tyle-sherds, and Heaps of
Rubbish, from the Tops of the Houses, lying almost at every Door.

From Two of the Clock the Storm continued, and encreased till Five in
the Morning; and from Five, to half an Hour after Six, it blew with the
greatest Violence: the Fury of it was so exceeding great for that
particular Hour and half, that if it had not abated as it did, nothing
could have stood its Violence much longer.

In this last Part of the Time the greatest Part of the Damage was done:
Several Ships that rode it out till now, gave up all; for no Anchor
could hold. Even the Ships in the River of _Thames_ were all blown away
from their Moorings, and from _Execution-Dock_ to _Lime-House Hole_
there was but our Ships that rid it out, the rest were driven down into
the _Bite_, as the Sailors call it, from _Bell-Wharf_ to _Lime-House_;
where they were huddeld together and drove on Shore, Heads and Sterns,
one upon another, in such a manner, as any one would have thought it had
been impossible: and the Damage done on that Account was incredible.

Together with the Violence of the Wind, the Darkness of the Night added
to the Terror of it; and as it was just New Moon, the Spring Tides being
then up at about Four a Clock, made the Vessels, which were a-float in
the River, drive the farther up upon the Shore: of all which, in the
Process of this Story, we shall find very strange Instances.

The Points from whence the Wind blew, are variously reported from
various Hands: 'Tis certain, it blew all the Day before at S.W. and I
thought it continued so till about Two a Clock; when, as near as I could
judge by the Impressions it made on the House, for we durst not look
out, it veer'd to the S.S.W. then to the W. and about Six a Clock to
W. by N. and still the more Northward it shifted, the harder it blew,
till it shifted again Southerly about Seven a Clock; and as it did so,
it gradually abated.

About Eight a Clock in the Morning it ceased so much, that our Fears
were also abated, and People began to peep out of Doors; but 'tis
impossible to express the Concern that appear'd in every Place: the
Distraction and Fury of the Night was visible in the Faces of the
People, and every Body's first Work was to visit and enquire after
Friends and Relations. The next Day or Two was almost entirely spent in
the Curiosity of the People, in viewing the Havock the Storm had made,
which was so universal in _London_, and especially in the Out-Parts,
that nothing can be said sufficient to describe it.

Another unhappy Circumstance with which this Disaster was join'd, was a
prodigious Tide, which happen'd the next Day but one, and was occasion'd
by the Fury of the Winds: which is also a Demonstration, that the Winds
veer'd for Part of the Time to the Northward: and as it is observable,
and known by all that understand our Sea Affairs, that a North West Wind
makes the Highest Tide, so this blowing to the Northward, and that with
such unusual Violence, brought up the Sea raging in such a manner, that
in some Parts of _England_ 'twas incredible, the Water rising Six or
Eight Foot higher than it was ever known to do in the Memory of Man; by
which Ships were fleeted up upon the firm Land several Rods off from the
Banks, and an incredible Number of Cattle and People drown'd; as in the
Pursuit of this Story will appear.

It was a special Providence that so directed the Waters, that in the
River of _Thames_, the Tide, though it rise higher than usual, yet it
did not so prodigiously exceed; but the Height of them as it was, prov'd
very prejudicial to abundance of People whose Cellars and Ware-houses
were near the River; and had the Water risen a Foot higher, all the
Marshes and Levels on both sides the River had been over-flowed, and a
great part of the Cattle drowned.

Though the Storm abated with the rising of the Sun, it still blew
exceeding hard; so hard, that no Boats durst stir out on the River, but
on extraordinary Occasions: and about Three a Clock in the Afternoon,
the next Day being _Saturday_, it increas'd again, and we were in a
fresh Consternation, lest it should return with the same Violence. At
Four it blew an extreme Storm, with Sudden Gusts as violent as any time
of the Night; but as it came with a great black Cloud, and some Thunder,
it brought a hasty Shower of Rain which allay'd the Storm: so that in a
quarter of an Hour it went off, and only continued blowing as before.

This sort of Weather held all _Sabbath-Day_ and _Monday_, till on
_Tuesday_ Afternoon it encreased again; and all _Tuesday_ Night it blew
with such Fury, that many Families were afraid to go to Bed: And had not
the former terrible Night harden'd the People to all things less than it
self, this Night would have pass'd for a Storm fit to have been noted in
our Almanacks. Several Stacks of Chimneys that stood out the great
Storm, were blown down in this; several Ships which escap'd in the great
Storm, perish'd this Night; and several People who had repair'd their
Houses, had them untiled again. Not but that I may allow those Chimneys
that fell now might have been disabled before.

At this Rate it held blowing till _Wednesday_ about One a Clock in the
Afternoon, which was that Day Seven-night on which it began; so that it
might be called one continued Storm from _Wednesday_ Noon to _Wednesday_
Noon: in all which time, there was not one Interval of Time in which a
Sailor would not have acknowledged it blew a Storm; and in that time two
such terrible Nights as I have describ'd.

And this I particularly noted as to Time, _Wednesday, Nov._ the 24_th_
was a calm fine Day as at that time of Year shall be seen; till above
Four a Clock, when it began to be Cloudy, and the Wind rose of a sudden,
and in half an Hours Time it blew a Storm. _Wednesday, Dec._ the 2_d._
it was very tempestuous all the Morning; at One a Clock the Wind abated,
the Sky clear'd, and by Four a Clock there was not a Breath of Wind.

Thus ended the Greatest and the Longest Storm that ever the World saw.
The Effects of this terrible Providence are the Subject of the ensuing
Chapter; and I close this with a Pastoral Poem sent us among the
Accounts of the Storm from a very ingenious Author, and desir'd to be
publish'd in this Account.


    _A PASTORAL, Occasion'd by the Late Violent Storm_

      _Damon, Melibæus._

    DAM.

    _Walking alone by pleasant Isis side
    Where the two Streams their wanton course divide,
    And gently forward in soft Murmurs glide;
    Pensive and sad I_ Melibæus _meet,
    And thus the melancholy Shepherd greet.
      Kind Swain, what Cloud dares overcast your brow,
    Bright as the Skies o're happy_ Nile _till now!
    Does_ Chloe _prove unkind, or some new Fair?_

    MEL.

    _No_ Damon, _mine's a publick, nobler, Care;
    Such in which you and all the World must share.        10
    One Friend may mollifie another's Grief,
    But publick Loss admits of no relief._

    DAM.

    _I guess your Cause: O you that use to sing
    Of Beauty's Charms and the Delights of Spring;
    Now change your Note, and let your Lute rehearse
    The dismal Tale in melancholy Verse._

    MEL.

    _Prepare then, lovely Swain; prepare to hear,
    The worst Report that ever reach'd your Ear.
      My_ Bower _you know, hard by yon shady Grove,
    A fit Recess for_ Damon_'s pensive Love:               20
    As there dissolv'd I in sweet Slumbers lay,
    Tir'd with the Toils of the precedent Day,
    The blust'ring Winds disturb my kind Repose,
    Till frightned with the threatning Blasts, I rose.
    But O, what havock did the Day disclose!
    Those charming Willows which on_ Cherwel_'s banks
    Flourish'd, and thriv'd, and grew in evener ranks
    Than those which follow'd the Divine Command
    Of_ Orpheus _Lyre, or sweet_ Amphion_'s Hand,
    By hundreds fall, while hardly twenty stand.           30
    The stately Oaks which reach'd the azure Sky,
    And kiss'd the very Clouds, now prostrate lie.
    Long a huge Pine did with the Winds contend;
    This way, and that, his reeling Trunk they bend,
    Till forc'd at last to yield, with hideous Sound
    He falls, and all the Country feels the Wound.
      Nor was the God of Winds content with these;
    Such humble Victims can't his Wrath appease:
    The Rivers swell, not like the happy_ Nile,
    _To fatten, dew, and fructifie our_ Isle:              40
    _But like the_ Deluge, _by great Jove design'd
    To drown the Universe, and scourge Mankind.
    In vain the frighted Cattel climb so high,
    In vain for Refuge to the Hills they fly;
    The Waters know no Limits but the Sky.
    So now the bleating Flock exchange in vain,
    For barren Clifts, their dewy fertil Plain:
    In vain, their fatal Destiny to shun,
    From_ Severn_'s Banks to higher Grounds they run.
        Nor has the_ Navy _better Quarter found;           50
    There we've receiv'd our worst, our deepest Wound.
    The Billows swell, and haughty_ Neptune _raves,
    The Winds insulting o're th' impetuous Waves._
    Thetis _incens'd, rises with angry Frown,
    And once more threatens all the World to drown,
    And owns no Power, but_ England_'s and her own.
    Yet the_ Æolian _God dares vent his Rage;
    And ev'n the Sovereign of the Seas engage.
    What tho' the mighty_ Charles _of_ Spain_'s on board,
    The Winds obey none but their blust'ring Lord.         60
    Some Ships were stranded, some by Surges rent,
    Down with their Cargo to the bottom went.
    Th' absorbent Ocean could desire no more;
    So well regal'd he never was before.
    The hungry Fish could hardly wait the day,
    When the Sun's beams should chase the Storm away,
    But quickly seize with greedy Jaws their Prey._

    DAM.

    _So the great_ Trojan_, by the Hand of Fate,
    And haughty Power of angry_ Juno_'s Hate,
    While with like aim he cross'd the Seas, was tost,     70
    From Shore to Shore, from foreign Coast to Coast:
    Yet safe at last his mighty Point he gain'd;
    In charming promis'd Peace and Splendor reign'd._

    MEL.

    _So may_ Great Charles, _whom equal Glories move,
    Like the great_ Dardan Prince _successful prove:
    Like him, with Honour may he mount the Throne,
    And long enjoy a brighter destin'd Crown._




CHAPTER IV

_Of the Extent of this Storm, and from what Parts it was suppos'd to
come; with some Circumstances as to the Time of it_


As all our Histories are full of the Relations of Tempests and Storms
which have happened in various Parts of the World, I hope it may not be
improper that some of them have been thus observ'd with their remarkable
Effects.

But as I have all along insisted, that no Storm since the Universal
Deluge was like this, either in its Violence or its Duration, so I must
also confirm it as to the particular of its prodigious Extent.

All the Storms and Tempests we have heard of in the World, have been
Gusts or Squauls of Wind that have been carried on in their proper
Channels, and have spent their Force in a shorter space.

We feel nothing here of the Hurricanes of _Barbadoes_, the North-Wests
of _New England_ and _Virginia_, the terrible Gusts of the _Levant_, or
the frequent Tempests of the _North Cape_. When Sir _Francis Wheeler_'s
Squadron perish'd at _Gibralter_, when the City of _Straelsond_ was
almost ruin'd by a Storm, _England_ felt it not, nor was the Air here
disturb'd with the Motion. Even at home we have had Storms of violent
Wind in one part of _England_ which have not been felt in another. And
if what I have been told has any truth in it, in St. _George_'s Channel
there has frequently blown a Storm at Sea right up and down the Channel,
which has been felt on neither Coast, tho it is not above 20 Leagues
from the _English_ to the _Irish_ Shore.

Sir _William Temple_ gives us the Particulars of two terrible Storms in
_Holland_ while he was there; in one of which the great Cathedral Church
at _Utrecht_ was utterly destroy'd: and after that there was a Storm so
violent in _Holland_, that 46 Vessels were cast away at the _Texel_, and
almost all the Men drowned: and yet we felt none of these Storms here.

And for this very reason I have reserv'd an Abridgment of these former
Cases to this place; which as they are recited by Sir _William Temple_,
I shall put them down in his own Words, being not capable to mend them,
and not vain enough to pretend to it.

'I stay'd only a Night at _Antwerp_, which pass'd with so great Thunders
and Lightnings, that I promis'd my self a very fair Day after it, to go
back to _Rotterdam_ in the _States_ Yacht, that still attended me. The
Morning prov'd so; but towards Evening the Sky grew foul, and the Sea
men presag'd ill Weather, and so resolved to lie at Anchor before
_Bergen ap Zoom_, the Wind being cross and little. When the Night was
fallen as black as ever I saw, it soon began to clear up, with the most
violent Flashes of Lightning as well as Cracks of Thunder, that I
believe have ever been heard in our Age and Climate. This continued all
Night; and we felt such a fierce Heat from every great Flash of
Lightning, that the Captain apprehended it would fire his Ship. But
about 8 the next Morning the Wind changed, and came up with so strong a
Gale, that we came to _Rotterdam_ in about 4 Hours, and there found all
Mouths full of the Mischiefs and Accidents that the last Night's Tempest
had occasioned both among the Boats and the Houses, by the Thunder,
Lightning, Hail, or Whirlwinds. But the Day after came Stories to the
_Hague_ from all Parts, of such violent Effects as were almost
incredible: At _Amsterdam_ they were deplorable, many Trees torn up by
the Roots, Ships sunk in the Harbour, and Boats in the Channels; Houses
beaten down, and several People were snatch'd from the Ground as they
walk'd the Streets, and thrown into the Canals. But all was silenc'd by
the Relations from _Utrecht_, where the Great and Ancient Cathedral was
torn in pieces by the Violences of this Storm; and the vast Pillars of
Stone that supported it, were wreathed like a twisted Club, having been
so strongly compos'd and cimented, as rather to suffer such a Change of
Figure than break in pieces, as other Parts of the Fabrick did; hardly
any Church in the Town escap'd the Violence of this Storm; and very few
Houses without the Marks of it; Nor were the Effects of it less
astonishing by the Relations from _France_ and _Brussels_, where the
Damages were infinite, as well from Whirlwinds, Thunder, Lightning, as
from Hail-stones of prodigious Bigness. This was in the Year 1674.

'In _November_, 1675, happen'd a Storm at _North-West_, with a
Spring-tide, so violent, as gave apprehensions of some loss
irrecoverable to the Province of _Holland_, and by several breaches in
the great Diques near _Enchusen_, and others between _Amsterdam_ and
_Harlem_, made way for such Inundations as had not been seen before by
any man then alive, and fill'd the Country with many relations of most
deplorable Events. But the incredible Diligence and unanimous Endeavours
of the People upon such occasions, gave a stop to the Fury of that
Element, and made way for recovering next Year all the Lands, though not
the People, Cattel, and Houses that had been lost.'

      _Thus far_ Sir William Temple.

I am also credibly inform'd that the greatest Storm that ever we had in
_England_ before, and which was as universal here as this, did no Damage
in _Holland_ or _France_, comparable to this Tempest: I mean the great
Wind in 1661. An Abstract of which, as it was printed in _Mirabilis
Annis_, an unknown, but unquestion'd Author, take as follows, in his own
Words.

    _A dreadful Storm of Wind, accompanied with Thunder, Lightning, Hail
    and Rain; together with the sad Effects of it in many Parts of the
    Nation._

Upon the 18_th_ of _February_, 1661, being _Tuesday_, very early in the
Morning, there began a very great and dreadful Storm of Wind
(accompanied with Thunder, Lightning, Hail, and Rain, which in many
Places were as salt as Brine) which continued with a strange and unusual
Violence till almost Night: the sad Effects whereof throughout the
Nation are so many, that a very great Volume is not sufficient to
contain the Narrative of them. And indeed some of them are so
stupendious and amazing, that the Report of them, though from never so
authentick Hands, will scarce gain Credit among any but those that have
an affectionate Sense of the unlimited Power of the Almighty, knowing
and believing that there is nothing too hard for Him to do.

Some few of which wonderful Effects we shall give a brief Account of,
as we have received them from Persons of most unquestionable Credit in
the several Parts of the Nation.

In the City of _London_, and in _Covent Garden_ and other Parts about
_London_ and _Westminster_, five or six Persons were killed outright by
the Fall of Houses and Chimneys; especially one Mr. _Luke Blith_ an
Attorney, that lived at or near _Stamford_ in the County of _Lincoln_,
was killed that Day by the fall of a Riding-House not far from
_Pickadilla_: and there are some very remarkable Circumstances in this
Man's Case, which do make his Death to appear at least like a most
eminent Judgment and severe Stroak of the Lord's Hand upon him.

From other Parts likewise we have received certain Information, that
divers Persons were killed by the Effects of this great Wind.

At _Chiltenham_ in _Gloucestershire_, a Maid was killed by the Fall of a
Tree, in or near the Church-Yard.

An honest Yeoman likewise of _Scaldwel_ in _Northamptonshire_, being
upon a Ladder to save his Hovel, was blown off, and fell upon a Plough,
died outright, and never spoke Word more.

Also at _Tewksbury_ in _Gloucestershire_, a Man was blown from an House,
and broken to Pieces.

At _Elsbury_ likewise in the same County, a Woman was killed by the Fall
of Tiles or Bricks from an House.

And not far from the same Place, a Girl was killed by the Fall of a
Tree.

Near _Northampton_, a Man was killed by the Fall of a great Barn.

Near _Colchester_, a Young-man was killed by the Fall of a Wind-mill.

Not far from _Ipswich_ in _Suffolk_, a Man was killed by the Fall of a
Barn.

And about two Miles from the said Town of _Ipswich_, a Man was killed by
the Fall of a Tree.

At _Langton_, or near to it, in the County of _Leicester_, one Mr.
_Roberts_ had a Wind-mill blown down, in which were three Men; and by
the Fall of it, one of them was killed outright, a second had his Back
broken, and the other had his Arm or Leg struck off; and both of them
(according to our best Information) are since dead.

Several other Instances there are of the like Nature; but it would be
too tedious to mention them: Let these therefore suffice to stir us up
to Repentance, _lest we likewise perish_.

There are also many Effects of this Storm which are of another Nature,
whereof we shall give this following brief Account.

The Wind hath very much prejudiced many Churches in several Parts of the
Nation.

At _Tewksbury_ in _Gloucestershire_, it blew down a very fair Window
belonging to the Church there, both the Glass, and the Stone-work also;
the Doors likewise of that Church were blown open, much of the Lead torn
up, and some Part of a fair Pinnacle thrown down.

Also at _Red-Marly_ and _Newin_, not far from _Tewksbury_, their
Churches are extreamly broken and shatter'd, if not a considerable part
of them blown down. The like was done to most, if not all the Publick
Meeting-places at _Gloucester_ City. And it is reported, that some
Hundreds of Pounds will not suffice to repair the Damage done to the
Cathedral at _Worcester_, especially in that Part that is over the
Quire.

The like Fate happen'd to many more of them, as _Hereford_, and
_Leighton Beau-desart_ in _Bedfordshire_, and _Eaton-Soken_ in the same
County; where they had newly erected a very fair Cross of Stone, which
the Wind blew down: and, as some of the Inhabitants did observe, that
was the first Damage which that Town sustained by the Storm, though
afterwards in other respects also they were in the same Condition with
their Neighbours. The Steeples also, and other Parts of the Churches of
_Shenley_, _Waddon_, and _Woolston_ in the County of _Bucks_, have been
very much rent and torn by the Wind. The Spire of _Finchinfield_ Steeple
in the County of _Essex_, was blown down, and it brake through the Body
of the Church, and spoil'd many of the Pews; some Hundreds of Pounds
will not repair that Loss. But that which is most remarkable of this
kind, is, the Fall of that most famous Spire, or Pinnacle of the
Tower-Church in _Ipswich_: it was blown down upon the Body of the
Church, and fell reversed, the sharp End of the Shaft striking through
the Leads on the South-side of the Church, carried much of the
Timber-work down before it into the Alley just behind the Pulpit, and
took off one Side of the Sounding-board over the Pulpit: it shattered
many Pews: The Weather-Cock, and the Iron upon which it stood, broke off
as it fell; but the narrowest Part of the Wood-work, upon which the Fane
stood, fell into the Alley, broke quite through a Grave-stone, and ran
shoring under two Coffins that had been placed there one on another;
that Part of the Spire which was pluck'd up was about three Yards deep
in the Earth, and it is believed some Part of it is yet behind in the
Ground: some Hundreds of Pounds will not make good the Detriment done to
the Church by the Fall of this Pinnacle.

Very great Prejudice has been done to private Houses; many of them blown
down, and others extreamly shattered and torn. It is thought that five
thousand Pounds will not make good the Repairs at _Audley-End House_,
which belongs to the Earl of _Suffolk_. A good Part also of the
Crown-Office in the _Temple_ is blown down. The Instances of this kind
are so many and so obvious, that it would needlesly take up too much
time to give the Reader an Account of the Collection of them; only there
has been such a wonderful Destruction of Barns, that (looking so much
like a Judgment from the Lord, who the last Year took away our Corn, and
this our Barns) we cannot but give a short Account of some Part of that
Intelligence which hath come to our Hands of that Nature.

A Gentleman, of good Account, in _Ipswich_, affirms, that in a few Miles
riding that Day, there was eleven Barns and Out-houses blown down in the
Road within his View; and within a very few Miles of _Ipswich_ round
about, above thirty Barns, and many of them with Corn in them, were
blown down. At _Southold_ not far from the Place before mentioned, many
new Houses and Barns (built since a late Fire that happened there) are
blown down; as also a Salt-house is destroyed there: and a thousand
Pounds, as it is believed, will not make up that particular Loss.

From _Tewksbury_ it is certified, that an incredible Number of Barns
have been blown down in the small Towns and Villages thereabouts. At
_Twyning_, at least eleven Barns are blown down. In _Ashchurch_ Parish
seven or eight. At _Lee_, five. At _Norton_, a very great Number, three
whereof belonging to one Man. The great Abby-Barn also at _Tewksbury_ is
blown down.

It is credibly reported, that within a very few Miles Circumference in
_Worcestershire_, about an hundred and forty Barns are blown down. At
_Finchinfield_ in _Essex_, which is but an ordinary Village, about
sixteen Barns were blown down. Also at a Town called _Wilchamsted_ in
the County of _Bedford_ (a very small Village) fifteen Barns at least
are blown down. But especially the Parsonage Barns went to wrack in many
Places throughout the Land: In a few Miles Compass in _Bedfordshire_,
and so in _Northamptonshire_, and other Places, eight, ten, and twelve
are blown down; and at _Yielding Parsonage_ in the County of _Bedford_
(out of which was thrust by Oppression and Violence the late Incumbent)
all the Barns belonging to it are down. The Instances also of this kind
are innumerable, which we shall therefore forbear to make further
mention of.

We have also a large Account of the blowing down of a very great and
considerable Number of Fruit-Trees, and other Trees in several Parts; we
shall only pick out two or three Passages which are the most remarkable.
In the Counties of _Gloucester_, _Hereford_, and _Worcester_, several
Persons have lost whole Orchards of Fruit-Trees; and many particular
Mens Loss hath amounted to the Value of forty or fifty Pounds at the
least, meerly by Destruction of their Fruit-Trees: and so in other Parts
of _England_ proportionably the like Damage hath been sustained in this
Respect. And as for other Trees, there has been a great Destruction made
of them in many Places, by this Storm. Several were blown down at
_Hampton-Court_. And three thousand brave Oaks at least, but in one
principal Part of the Forest of _Dean_, belonging to his Majesty. In a
little Grove at _Ipswich_, belonging to the Lord of _Hereford_ (which
together with the Spire of the Steeple before-mentioned, were the most
considerable Ornaments of that Town) are blown down at least two hundred
goodly Trees, one of which was an Ash, which had ten Load of Wood upon
it: there are now few Trees left there.

In _Bramton Bryan Park_ in the County of _Hereford_, belonging to Sir
_Edward Harly_, one of the late Knights of the _Bath_, above thirteen
hundred Trees are blown down; and above six hundred in _Hopton Park_ not
far from it: and thus it is proportionably in most Places where this
Storm was felt. And the Truth is, the Damage which the People of this
Nation have sustained upon all Accounts by this Storm, is not easily to
be valued: some sober and discreet People, who have endeavoured to
compute the Loss of the several Counties one with another, by the
Destruction of Houses and Barns, the blowing away of Hovels and Ricks of
Corn, the falling of Trees, _&c._ do believe it can come to little less
than two Millions of Money.

There are yet behind many Particulars of a distinct Nature from those
that have been spoken of; some whereof are very wonderful, and call for
a very serious Observation of them.

In the Cities of _London_ and _Westminster_, especially on the Bridge
and near _Wallingford-house_, several Persons were blown down one on the
Top of another.

In _Hertfordshire_, a Man was taken up, carried a Pole in Length, and
blown over a very high Hedge; and the like in other Places.

The Water in the River of _Thames_, and other Places, was in a very
strange manner blown up into the Air: Yea, in the new Pond in _James's
Park_, the Fish, to the Number of at least two Hundred, where blown out
and lay by the Bank-side, whereof many were Eye-witnesses.

At _Moreclack_ in _Surry_, the _Birds_, as they attempted to fly, were
beaten down to the Ground by the Violence of the Wind.

At _Epping_ in the County of _Essex_, a very great Oak was blown down,
which of it self was raised again, and doth grow firmly at this Day.

At _Taunton_, a great Tree was blown down, the upper Part whereof rested
upon a Brick or Stone-wall, and after a little time, by the force of the
Wind, the lower part of the Tree was blown quite over the Wall.

In the City of _Hereford_, several persons were, by the Violence of the
Wind, borne up from the Ground; one Man (as it is credibly reported) at
least six Yards.

The great Fane at _Whitehall_ was blown down; and one of the four which
were upon the _white Tower_, and two more of them strangely bent; which
are to be seen at this Day, to the Admiration of all that behold them.

The several _Triumphant Arches_ in the City of _London_ were much
shattered and torn; That in _Leaden-hall-Street_ lost the King's Arms,
and many other rare Pieces that were affixed to it; That in _Cheapside_,
which represented the Church, suffered very much by the Fury of the
Storm; and a great Part of that in _Fleet Street_ (which represented
Plenty) was blown down: but, blessed be God, none as we hear of were
either killed or hurt by the Fall of it.

The Wind was so strong, that it blew down several Carts loaded with Hay
in the Road between _Barnet_ and _London_; and in other Roads leading to
the City of _London_.

_Norwich_ Coach, with four or six Horses, was not able to come towards
_London_, but stayed by the way till the Storm was somewhat abated.

It is also credibly reported, That all, or some of the Heads which were
set up upon _Westminster-Hall_, were that Day blown down.

There was a very dreadful Lightning which did at first accompany the
Storm, and by it some of his Majesty's Houshold conceive that the Fire
which happened at _Whitehall_ that Morning, was kindled; as also that at
_Greenwich_, by which (as we are informed) seven or eight Houses were
burnt down.

      _Thus far the Author of_ Mirabilis Annis.

'Tis very observable, that this Storm blew from the same Quarter as the
last, and that they had less of it Northward than here; in which they
were much alike.

Now as these Storms were perhaps very furious in some Places, yet they
neither came up to the Violence of this, nor any way to be compar'd for
the Extent, and when ruinous in one County, were hardly heard of in the
next.

But this terrible Night shook all _Europe_; and how much farther it
extended, he only knows who _has his way in the Whirlwind, and in the
Storm, and the Clouds are the Dust of his Feet_.

As this Storm was first felt from the West, some have conjectur'd that
the first Generation or rather Collection of Materials, was from the
Continent of _America_, possibly from that part of _Florida_ and
_Virginia_ where, if we respect natural Causes, the Confluence of
Vapours rais'd by the Sun from the vast and unknown Lakes and Inland
Seas of Water, which as some relate are incredibly large as well as
numerous, might afford sufficient Matter for the Exhalation; and where
time adding to the Preparation, God, who has generally confin'd his
Providence to the Chain of natural Causes, might muster together those
Troops of Combustion till they made a sufficient Army duly proportion'd
to the Expedition design'd.

I am the rather inclin'd to this Opinion, because we are told, they felt
upon that Coast an unusual Tempest a few Days before the fatal 27th of
_November_.

I confess, I have never studied the Motion of the Clouds so nicely, as
to calculate how long time this Army of Terror might take up in its
furious March; possibly the Velocity of its Motion might not be so great
at its first setting out as it was afterward, as a Horse that is to run
a Race does not immediately put himself into the height of his Speed:
and tho' it may be true, that by the length of the way the force of the
Wind spends it self, and so by degrees ceases as the Vapour finds more
room for Dilation; besides, yet we may suppose a Conjunction of some
confederate Matter which might fall in with it by the way, or which
meeting it at its Arrival here, might join Forces in executing the
Commission receiv'd from above, all natural Causes being allow'd a
Subserviency to the Direction of the great supream Cause; yet where the
vast Collection of Matter had its first Motion, as it did not all take
Motion in one and the same moment, so when all the Parts had felt the
Influence, as they advanc'd and press'd those before them, the Violence
must increase in proportion: and thus we may conceive that the Motion
might not have arriv'd at its Meridian Violence till it reach'd our
Island; and even then it blew some Days with more than common fury, yet
much less than that last Night of its force; and even that Night the
Violence was not at its extremity till about an hour before Sun-rise,
and then it continued declining, tho' it blew a full Storm for four Days
after it.

Thus Providence, by whose special Direction the Quantity and Conduct of
this Judgment was manag'd, seem'd to proportion things so, as that by
the course of things the proportion of Matter being suited to Distance
of Place, the Motion shou'd arrive at its full Force just at the Place
where its Execution was to begin.

As then our Island was the first, this way, to receive the Impressions
of the violent Motion, it had the terriblest Effects here; and
continuing its steady Course, we find it carried a true Line clear over
the Continent of _Europe_, travers'd _England_, _France_, _Germany_, the
_Baltick_ Sea, and passing the Northern Continent of _Sweedland_,
_Finland_, _Muscovy_, and part of _Tartary_, must at last lose it self
in the vast Northern Ocean, where Man never came, and Ship never sail'd;
and its Violence cou'd have no effect, but upon the vast Mountains of
Ice and the huge Drifts of Snow, in which Abyss of Moisture and Cold it
is very probable the Force of it was check'd, and the World restor'd to
Calmness and Quiet: and in this Circle of Fury it might find its End not
far off from where it had its Beginning, the Fierceness of the Motion
perhaps not arriving to a Period, till having pass'd the Pole, it
reached again the Northern Parts of _America_.

The Effects of this impetuous Course, are the proper Subjects of this
Book; and what they might be before our Island felt its Fury, who can
tell? Those unhappy Wretches who had the misfortune to meet it in its
first Approach, can tell us little, having been hurried by its
irresistible Force directly into Eternity: how many they are, we cannot
pretend to give an Account; we are told of about seventeen Ships, which
having been out at Sea are never heard of: which is the common way of
Discourse of Ships founder'd in the Ocean: and indeed all we can say of
them is, the fearful _Exit_ they have made among the Mountains of
Waters, can only be duly reflected on by those who have seen those
Wonders of God in the Deep.

Yet I cannot omit here to observe, That this Loss was in all probability
much less than it would otherwise have been; because the Winds having
blown with very great Fury, at the same Point, for near fourteen Days
before the Violence grew to its more uncommon height, all those Ships
which were newly gone to Sea were forc'd back, of which some were
driven into _Plymouth_ and _Falmouth_ who had been above a hundred and
fifty Leagues at Sea; others, which had been farther, took Sanctuary in
_Ireland_.

On the other hand, All those Ships which were homeward bound, and were
within 500 Leagues of the _English_ Shore, had been hurried so furiously
on _afore it_ (_as the Seamen say_) that they had reach'd their Port
before the Extremity of the Storm came on; so that the Sea was as it
were swept clean of all Shipping, those which were coming home were
blown home before their time; those that had attempted to put to Sea,
were driven back again in spight of all their Skill and Courage: for the
Wind had blown so very hard, directly into the Channel, that there was
no possibility of their keeping the Sea whose Course was not right afore
the Wind.

On the other hand, these two Circumstances had fill'd all our Ports with
unusual Fleets of Ships, either just come home or outward-bound, and
consequently the Loss among them was very terrible; and the Havock it
made among them, tho' it was not so much as every body expected, was
such as no Age or Circumstance can ever parallel, and we hope will never
feel again.

Nay, so high the Winds blew even before _that we call the Storm_, that
had not that intolerable Tempest follow'd so soon after, we should have
counted those Winds extraordinary high: and any one may judge of the
Truth of this from these few Particulars; That the _Russia_ Fleet,
compos'd of near a hundred Sail, which happen'd to be then upon the
Coast, was absolutely dispers'd and scatter'd, some got into
_Newcastle_, some into _Hull_, and some into _Yarmouth_ Roads; two
founder'd in the Sea; one or two more run a-shore, and were lost; and
the _Reserve_ Frigat, their Convoy, founder'd in _Yarmouth_ Roads, all
her Men being lost, and no Boat from the Shore durst go off to relieve
her, tho' it was in the Day-time, but all her Men perished.

In the same previous Storms the--Man of War was lost off of _Harwich_;
but by the help of smaller Vessels most of her Men were sav'd.

And so high the Winds blew for near a Fortnight, that no Ship stirr'd
out of Harbour; and all the Vessels, great or small, that were out at
Sea, made for some Port or other for shelter.

In this juncture of time it happen'd, that together with the _Russia_
Fleet, a great Fleet of Laden Colliers, near 400 Sail, were just put out
of the River _Tine_: and these being generally deep and unweildy Ships,
met with hard measure, tho' not so fatal to them as was expected: such
of them as could run in for _Humber_, where a great many were lost
afterwards, as I shall relate in its course; some got shelter under the
high Lands of _Cromer_ and the Northern Shores of the County of
_Norfolk_, and the greater number reach'd into _Yarmouth_ Roads.

So that when the Great Storm came, our Ports round the Sea-Coast of
_England_ were exceeding full of Ships of all sorts: a brief account
whereof take as follows.

At _Grimsby_, _Hull_, and the other Roads of the _Humber_, lay about 80
Sail, great and small, of which about 50 were Colliers, and part of the
_Russia_ Fleet as aforesaid.

In _Yarmouth_ Roads there rode at least 400 Sail, being most of them
Laden Colliers, _Russia_ Men, and Coasters from _Lynn_ and _Hull_.

In the River of _Thames_, at the _Nore_, lay about 12 Sail of the
Queen's hir'd Ships and Store-ships, and only two Men of War.

Sir _Cloudsly Shovel_ was just arriv'd from the _Mediterranean_ with the
Royal Navy: Part of them lay at _St. Hellens_, part in the _Downs_, and
with 12 of the biggest Ships he was coming round the _Foreland_ to bring
them into _Chatham_; and when the Great Storm began was at an Anchor at
the _Gunfleet_, from whence the _Association_ was driven off from Sea as
far as the Coast of _Norway_: What became of the rest, I refer to a
Chapter by it self.

At _Gravesend_ there rode five _East India_ Men, and about 30 Sail of
other Merchant-men, all outward bound.

In the _Downs_ 160 Sail of Merchant Ships outward bound, besides that
part of the Fleet which came in with Sir _Cloudsly Shovel_, which
consisted of about 18 Men of War, with Tenders and Victuallers.

At _Portsmouth_ and _Cowes_ there lay three Fleets; first, a Fleet of
Transports and Tenders, who with Admiral _Dilks_ brought the Forces from
_Ireland_ that were to accompany the King of _Spain_ to _Lisbon_;
secondly, a great Fleet of Victuallers, Tenders, Store-ships, and
Transports, which lay ready for the same Voyage, together with about 40
Merchant-ships, who lay for the benefit of their Convoy; and the third
Article was, the Remainder of the Grand Fleet which came in with Sir
_Cloudsly Shovel_; in all almost 300 Sail, great and small.

In _Plymouth_ Sound, _Falmouth_ and _Milford_ Havens, were particularly
several small Fleets of Merchant-ships, driven in for Shelter and
Harbour from the Storm, most homeward bound from the Islands and
Colonies of _America_.

The _Virginia_ Fleet, _Barbadoes_ Fleet, and some _East India_ Men, lay
scatter'd in all our Ports, and in _Kinsale_ in _Ireland_ there lay near
80 Sail, homeward bound and richly laden.

At _Bristol_ about 20 Sail of home-bound _West India_ Men, not yet
unladen.

In _Holland_, the Fleet of Transports for _Lisbon_ waited for the King
of _Spain_, and several _English_ Men of War lay at _Helvoet Sluice_;
the _Dutch_ Fleet from the _Texel_ lay off of _Cadsandt_, with their
Forces on Board, under the Admiral _Callenberge_. Both these Fleets made
180 Sail.

I think I may very safely affirm, That hardly in the Memory of the
oldest Man living, was a juncture of Time when an Accident of this
nature could have happen'd, that so much Shipping, laden out and home,
ever was in Port at one time.

No Man will wonder that the Damages to this Nation were so great, if
they consider these unhappy Circumstances: it shou'd rather be wonder'd
at, that we have no more Disasters to account to Posterity, but that the
Navigation of this Country came off so well.

And therefore some People have excus'd the Extravagancies of the _Paris
Gazetteer_, who affirm'd in Print, that there was 30000 Sea-men lost in
the several Ports of _England_, and 300 Sail of Ships; which they say
was a probable Conjecture; and that considering the multitude of
Shipping, the Openness of the Roads in the _Downs_, _Yarmouth_, and the
_Nore_, and the prodigious Fury of the Wind, any Man would have guess'd
the same as he.

'Tis certain, It is a thing wonderful to consider, that especially in
the _Downs_ and _Yarmouth_ Roads any thing shou'd be safe: all Men that
know how wild a Road the first is, and what Crowds of Ships there lay in
the last; how almost every thing quitted the Road, and neither Anchor
nor Cable would hold; must wonder what Shift or what Course the Mariners
could direct themselves to for Safety.

Some which had not a Mast standing, nor an Anchor or Cable left them,
went out to Sea wherever the Winds drove them; and lying like a Trough
in the Water, wallow'd about till the Winds abated; and after were
driven, some into one Port, some into another, as Providence guided
them.

In short, Horror and Confusion seiz'd upon all, whether on Shore or at
Sea: No Pen can describe it, no Tongue can express it, no Thought
conceive it, unless some of those who were in the Extremity of it; and
who, being touch'd with a due sense of the sparing Mercy of their Maker,
retain the deep Impressions of his Goodness upon their Minds, tho' the
Danger be past: and of those I doubt the Number is but few.




OF THE EFFECTS OF THE STORM


The particular dreadful Effects of this Tempest, are the Subject of the
ensuing Part of this History: And tho' the Reader is not to expect that
all the Particulars can be put into this Account, and perhaps many very
remarkable Passages may never come to our Knowledge; yet as we have
endeavour'd to furnish our selves with the most authentick Accounts we
could from all Parts of the Nation, and a great many worthy Gentlemen
have contributed their Assistance in various, and some very exact
Relations and curious Remarks; so we pretend, not to be meanly furnish'd
for this Work.

Some Gentlemen, whose Accounts are but of common and trivial Damages, we
hope will not take it ill from the Author, if they are not inserted at
large; for that we are willing to put in nothing here common with other
Accidents of like nature; or which may not be worthy of a History and a
Historian to record them; nothing but, what may serve to assist in
convincing Posterity that this was the most violent Tempest the World
ever saw.

From hence 'twill follow, that those Towns who only had their Houses
until'd, their Barns and Hovels levell'd with the Ground, and the like,
will find very little notice taken of them in this Account; because if
these were to be the Subject of a History, I presume it must be equally
voluminous with _Fox_, _Grimston_, _Holinshead_ or _Stow_.

Nor shall I often trouble the Reader with the Multitude or Magnitude of
Trees blown down, whole Parks ruin'd, fine Walks defac'd, and Orchards
laid flat, and the like: and tho' I had, my self, the Curiosity to count
the Number of Trees, in a Circuit I rode, over most part of _Kent_, in
which being tired with the Number, I left off reckoning after I had gone
on to 17000; and tho' I have great reason to believe I did not observe
one half of the Quantity; yet in some Parts of _England_, as in
_Devonshire_ especially, and the Counties of _Worcester_, _Gloucester_,
and _Hereford_, which are full of very large Orchards of Fruit-Trees,
they had much more mischief.

In the Pursuit of this Work, I shall divide it into the following
Chapters or Sections, that I may put it into as good Order as possible.

    1. Of the Damage in the City of _London_, &c.
    2.               in the Counties.
    3.}                {in the Royal Navy.
      } _On the Water_ {
    4.}                {to Shipping in general.
    5.                  by Earthquake.
    6.                  by High Tides.
    7. Remarkable Providences and Deliverances.
    8. Hardned and blasphemous Contemners both of the Storm and its
    Effects.
    9. Some Calculations of Damage sustain'd.
    10. The Conclusion.

We had design'd a Chapter for the Damages abroad, and have been at no
small Charge to procure the Particulars from foreign Parts; which are
now doing in a very authentick manner: but as the World has been long
expecting this Work, and several Gentlemen who were not a little
contributing to the Information of the Author, being unwilling to stay
any longer for the Account, it was resolved to put it into the Press
without any farther Delay: and if the foreign Accounts can be obtain'd
in time, they shall be a Supplement to the Work; if not, some other
Method shall be found out to make them publick.




_I. Of the Damages in the City of London, and Parts adjacent_


Indeed the City was a strange Spectacle, the Morning after the Storm, as
soon as the People could put their Heads out of Doors: though I believe,
every Body expected the Destruction was bad enough; yet I question very
much, if any Body believed the Hundredth Part of what they saw.

The Streets lay so covered with Tiles and Slates, from the Tops of the
Houses, especially in the Out-parts, that the Quantity is incredible:
and the Houses were so universally stript, that all the Tiles in Fifty
Miles round would be able to repair but a small Part of it.

Something may be guest at on this Head, from the sudden Rise of the
Price of Tiles; which rise from 21 _s. per_ Thousand to 6 _l._ for plain
Tiles; and from 50 _s. per_ Thousand for Pantiles, to 10 _l._ and
Bricklayers Labour to 5 _s. per_ Day: And tho' after the first Hurry the
Prices fell again, it was not that the Quantity was supply'd; but
because,

1_st_, The Charge was so extravagant, that an universal Neglect of
themselves, appear'd both in Landlord and Tenant; an incredible Number
of Houses remain'd all the Winter uncovered, and expos'd to all the
Inconveniences of Wet and Cold; and are so even at the Writing of this
Chapter.

2. Those People who found it absolutely necessary to cover their Houses,
but were unwilling to go to the extravagant Price of Tiles; chang'd
their Covering to that of Wood, as a present Expedient, till the Season
for making of Tiles should come on; and the first Hurry being over, the
Prices abate: and 'tis on this Score, that we see, to this Day, whole
Ranks of Buildings, as in _Christ Church Hospital_, the _Temple_,
_Asks-Hospital_, _Old-street_, _Hogsden-Squares_, and infinite other
Places, covered entirely with Deal Boards; and are like to continue so,
perhaps a Year or two longer, for Want of Tiles.

These two Reasons reduc'd the Tile-Merchants to sell at a more moderate
Price: But 'tis not an irrational Suggestion, that all the Tiles which
shall be made this whole Summer, will not repair the Damage in the
covering of Houses within the Circumference of the City, and Ten Miles
round.

The next Article in our Street Damage was, the Fall of Chimneys; and as
the Chimneys in the City Buildings are built in large Stacks, the Houses
being so high, the Fall of them had the more Power, by their own Weight,
to demolish the Houses they fell upon.

'Tis not possible to give a distinct Account of the Number, or
particular Stacks of Chimneys, which fell in this fatal Night; but the
Reader may guess by this Particular, that in _Cambray-House_, commonly
so called, a great House near _Islington_, belonging to the Family of
the _Comptons_, Earls of _Northampton_, but now let out into Tenements;
the Collector of these Remarks counted Eleven or Thirteen Stacks of
Chimneys, either wholly thrown in, or the greatest Parts of them at
least, what was expos'd to the Wind, blown off. I have heard Persons,
who pretended to observe the Desolation of that terrible Night very
nicely; and who, by what they had seen and enquired into, thought
themselves capable of making some Calculations, affirm, They could give
an Account of above Two Thousand Stacks of Chimneys blown down in and
about _London_; besides Gable Ends of Houses, some whole Roofs, and
Sixteen or Twenty whole Houses in the Out-Parts.

Under the Disaster of this Article, it seems most proper to place the
Loss of the Peoples Lives, who fell in this Calamity; since most of
those, who had the Misfortune to be killed, were buried, or beaten to
Pieces with the Rubbish of the several Stacks of Chimneys that fell.

Of these, our Weekly Bills of Mortality gave us an Account of Twenty
One; besides such as were drown'd in the River, and never found: and
besides above Two Hundred People very much wounded and maim'd.

One Woman was kill'd by the Fall of a Chimney in or near the Palace of
St. _James_'s, and a Stack of Chimneys falling in the new unfinish'd
Building there, and carried away a Piece of the Coin of the House.

Nine Souldiers were hurt, with the Fall of the Roof of the Guard-house
at _Whitehall_, but none of them died.

A Distiller in _Duke-Street_, with his Wife, and Maid-servant, were all
buried in the Rubbish of a Stack of Chimneys, which forced all the
Floors, and broke down to the Bottom of the House; the Wife was taken
out alive, though very much bruised, but her Husband and the Maid lost
their Lives.

One Mr. _Dyer_, a Plaisterer in _Fetter-Lane_, finding the Danger he was
in by the shaking of the House, jumpt out of Bed to save himself; and
had, in all Probability, Time enough to have got out of the House, but
staying to strike a Light, a Stack of Chimneys fell in upon him, kill'd
him, and wounded his Wife.

Two Boys at one Mr. _Purefoy's_, in _Cross-Street Hatton-Garden_, were
both kill'd, and buried in the Rubbish of a Stack of Chimneys; and a
third very much wounded.

A Woman in _Jewin-Street_, and Two Persons more near _Aldersgate-Street_,
were kill'd; the first, as it is reported, by venturing to run out of
the House into the Street; and the other Two by the Fall of a House.

In _Threadneedle-Street_, one Mr. _Simpson_, a Scrivener being in Bed
and fast a-sleep, heard nothing of the Storm; but the rest of the Family
being more sensible of Danger, some of them went up, and wak'd him; and
telling him their own Apprehensions, press'd him to rise; but he too
fatally sleepy, and consequently unconcern'd at the Danger, told them,
he did not apprehend any Thing; and so, notwithstanding all their
Persuasions, could not be prevailed with to rise: they had not been gone
many Minutes out of his Chamber, before the Chimneys fell in, broke
through the Roof over him, and kill'd him in his Bed.

A Carpenter in _White-Cross-Street_ was kill'd almost in the same
Manner, by a Stack of Chimneys of the _Swan_ Tavern, which fell into his
House; it was reported, That his Wife earnestly desir'd him not to go to
Bed; and had prevail'd upon him to sit up till near two a Clock, but
then finding himself very heavy, he would go to Bed against all his
Wife's Intreaties; after which she wak'd him, and desir'd him to rise,
which he refus'd, being something angry for being disturb'd; and going
to sleep again, was kill'd in his Bed: and his Wife, who would not go to
Bed, escap'd.

In this Manner, our Weekly Bills gave us an Account of Twenty One
Persons kill'd in the City of _London_, and Parts adjacent.

Some of our printed Accounts give us larger and plainer Accounts of the
Loss of Lives, than I will venture to affirm for Truth; as of several
Houses near _Moor-Fields_ levell'd with the Ground: Fourteen People
drowned in a Wherry going to _Gravesend_, and Five in a Wherry from
_Chelsey_. Not that it is not very probable to be true; but as I resolve
not to hand any thing to Posterity, but what comes very well attested, I
omit such Relations as I have not extraordinary Assurance as to the
Fact.

The Fall of Brick-Walls, by the Fury of this Tempest, in and about
_London_, would make a little Book of it self; and as this affects the
Out-Parts chiefly, where the Gardens and Yards are wall'd in, so few
such have escap'd; at St. _James_'s a considerable part of the Garden
Wall; at _Greenwich Park_ there are several pieces of the Wall down for
an Hundred Rods in a Place; and some much more, at _Battersey_,
_Chelsey_, _Putney_, at _Clapham_, at _Deptford_, at _Hackney_,
_Islington_, _Hogsden_, _Wood's Close_ by St. _John's Street_, and on
every side the City, the Walls of the Gardens have generally felt the
Shock, and lie flat on the Ground twenty, thirty Rod of walling in a
Place.

The publick Edifices of the City come next under our Consideration; and
these have had their Share in the Fury of this terrible Night.

A part of her Majesty's Palace, as is before observ'd, with a Stack of
Chimneys in the Centre of the new Buildings, then not quite finished,
fell with such a terrible Noise as very much alarm'd the whole Houshold.

The Roof of the Guard-house at _Whitehall_, as is also observ'd before,
was quite blown off; and the great Vane, or Weather-Cock at _Whitehall_
blown down.

The Lead, on the Tops of the Churches and other Buildings, was in many
Places roll'd up like a Roll of Parchment, and blown in some Places
clear off from the Buildings; as at _Westminster Abby_, St. _Andrews
Holbourn_, _Christ-Church Hospital_, and abundance of other Places.

Two of the new built Turrets, on the Top of St. _Mary Aldermary
Church_, were blown off, whereof One fell upon the Roof of the Church;
of Eight Pinnacles on the Top of St. _Albans Woodstreet_, Five of them
were blown down; Part of One of the Spires of St. _Mary Overies_ blown
off; Four Pinnacles on the Steeple of St. _Michael Crooked Lane_ blown
quite off: The Vanes and Spindles of the Weather-Cocks, in many places,
bent quite down; as on St. _Michael Cornhil_, St. _Sepulchres_, the
_Tower_, and divers other Places.

It was very remarkable, that the Bridge over the _Thames_ received but
little Damage, and not in Proportion to what in common Reason might be
expected; since the Buildings there stand high, and are not sheltered,
as they are in the Streets, one by another.

If I may be allow'd to give this Philosophical Account of it, I hope it
may not be absurd; that the Indraft of the Arches underneath the Houses
giving Vent to the Air, it past there with a more than common Current;
and consequently relieved the Buildings, by diverting the Force of the
Storm: I ask Pardon of the ingenious Reader for this Opinion, if it be
not regular, and only present it to the World for Want of a better; if
those better furnished _that Way_ will supply us with a truer Account, I
shall withdraw mine, and submit to theirs. The Fact however is certain,
that the Houses on the _Bridge_ did not suffer in Proportion to the
other Places; though all must allow, they do not seem to be stronger
built, than other Streets of the same sort.

Another Observation I cannot but make; to which, as I have Hundreds of
Instances, so I have many more Witnesses to the Truth of Fact, and the
uncommon Experiment has made it the more observ'd.

The Wind blew, during the whole Storm, between the Points of S.W. and
N.W., not that I mean it blew at all these Points, but I take a
Latitude of Eight Points to avoid Exceptions, and to confirm my
Argument; since what I am insisting upon, could not be a natural Cause
from the Winds blowing in any of those particular Points.

If a Building stood North and South, it must be a Consequence that the
East-side Slope of the Roof must be the Lee-side, lie out of the Wind,
be weather'd by the Ridge, and consequently receive no Damage in a
direct Line.

But against this rational way of arguing, we are convinced by
Demonstration and Experiment, after which Argument must be silent. It
was not in one Place or Two, but in many Places; that where a Building
stood ranging North and South, the Sides or Slopes of the Roof to the
East and the West, the East-side of the Roof would be stript and untiled
by the Violence of the Wind; and the West Side, which lay open to the
Wind, be sound and untouch'd.

This, I conceive, must happen either where the Building had some open
Part, as Windows or Doors to receive the Wind in the Inside, which being
pusht forward by the succeeding Particles of the Air, must force its Way
forward, and so lift off the Tiling on the Leeward side of the Building;
or it must happen from the Position of such Building near some other
higher Place or Building, where the Wind being repuls'd, must be forc'd
back again in Eddies; and consequently taking the Tiles from the lower
Side of the Roof, rip them up with the more Ease.

However it was, it appear'd in many Places, the Windward Side of the
Roof would be whole, and the Leeward Side, or the Side from the Wind, be
untiled; in other Places, a high Building next the Wind has been not
much hurt, and a lower Building on the Leeward Side of the high One
clean ript, and hardly a Tile left upon it: this is plain in the
Building of _Christ Church Hospital_ in _London_, where the Building on
the West and South Side of the Cloyster was at least Twenty Five Foot
higher than the East Side, and yet the Roof of the lower Side on the
East was quite untiled by the Storm; and remains at the Writing of This
covered with Deal Boards above an Hundred Foot in Length.

The blowing down of Trees may come in for another Article in this Part;
of which, in Proportion to the Quantity, here was as much as in any Part
of _England_: Some printed Accounts tell us of Seventy Trees in
_Moorfields_ blown down, which may be true; but that some of them were
Three Yards about, as is affirmed by the Authors, I cannot allow: above
a Hundred Elms in St. _James's Park_, some whereof were of such Growth,
as they tell us they were planted by Cardinal _Woolsey_; whether that
Part of it be true or not, is little to the Matter, but only to imply
that they were very great Trees: about _Baums_, commonly call'd
_Whitmore house_, there were above Two Hundred Trees blown down, and
some of them of extraordinary Size broken off in the middle.

And 'twas observ'd, that in the Morning after the Storm was abated, it
blew so hard, the Women, who usually go for Milk to the Cow-keepers in
the Villages round the City, were not able to go along with their Pails
on their Heads; and One, that was more hardy than the rest, was blown
away by the Fury of the Storm, and forced into a Pond, but by strugling
hard got out, and avoided being drowned; and some that ventured out with
Milk the Evening after, had their Pails and Milk blown off from their
Heads.

'Tis impossible to enumerate the Particulars of the Damage suffered, and
of the Accidents which happened under these several Heads, in and about
the City of _London_: The Houses looked like Skeletons, and an universal
Air of Horror seem'd to sit on the Countenances of the People; all
Business seem'd to be laid aside for the Time, and People were generally
intent upon getting Help to repair their Habitations.

It pleased God so to direct things, that there fell no Rain in any
considerable Quantity, except what fell the same Night or the ensuing
Day, for near Three Weeks after the Storm, though it was a Time of the
Year that is generally dripping. Had a wet Rainy Season followed the
Storm, the Damage which would have been suffered in and about this City
to Houshold Goods, Furniture and Merchandise, would have been
incredible, and might have equall'd all the the rest of the Calamity:
but the Weather prov'd fair and temperate for near a Month after the
Storm, which gave People a great deal of Leisure in providing themselves
Shelter, and fortifying their Houses against the Accidents of Weather by
Deal Boards, old Tiles, Pieces of Sail-Cloth, Tarpaulin, and the like.




_II. Of the Damages in the Country_


As the Author of this was an Eye-witness and Sharer of the Particulars
in the former Chapter; so, to furnish the Reader with Accounts as
authentick, and which he has as much cause to depend upon as if he had
seen them, he has the several Particulars following from like
Eye-witnesses; and that in such a manner, as I think their Testimony is
not to be question'd, most of the Gentlemen being of Piety and
Reputation.

And as a Publication was made to desire all Persons who were willing to
contribute to the forwarding this Work, and to transmit the Memory of so
signal a Judgment to Posterity, that they would be pleas'd to send up
such authentick Accounts of the Mischiefs, Damages, and Disasters in
their respective Counties that the World might rely on; it cannot,
without a great breach of Charity, be suppos'd that Men mov'd by such
Principles, without any private Interest or Advantage, would forge any
thing to impose upon the World, and abuse Mankind in Ages to come.

Interest, Parties, Strife, Faction, and particular Malice, with all the
scurvy Circumstances attending such things, may prompt Men to strain a
Tale beyond its real Extent; but, that Men shou'd invent a Story to
amuse Posterity, in a case where they have no manner of Motive, where
the only Design is to preserve the Remembrance of Divine Vengeance, and
put our Children in mind of God's Judgments upon their sinful Fathers,
this would be telling a Lye for God's sake, and doing Evil for the sake
of it self, which is a step beyond the Devil.

Besides, as most of our Relators have not only given us their Names, and
sign'd the Accounts they have sent, but have also given us Leave to hand
their Names down to Posterity with the Record of the Relation they give,
we would hope no Man will be so uncharitable to believe that Men would
be forward to set their Names to a voluntary Untruth, and have
themselves recorded to Posterity for having, without Motion, Hope,
Reward, or any other reason, impos'd a Falsity upon the World, and
dishonour'd our Relation with the useless Banter of an Untruth.

We cannot therefore but think, that as the Author believes himself
sufficiently back'd by the Authority of the Vouchers he presents, so
after what has been here premis'd, no Man will have any room to suspect
us of Forgery.

The ensuing Relation therefore, as to Damages in the Country, shall
consist chiefly of Letters from the respective Places where such things
have happen'd; only that as all our Letters are not concise enough to be
printed as they are, where it is otherwise the Letter is digested into a
Relation only; in which the Reader is assur'd we have always kept close
to the matter of fact.

And first, I shall present such Accounts as are entire, and related by
Men of Letters, principally by the Clergy; which shall be given you in
their own Words.

The first is from _Stowmarket_ in _Suffolk_, where, by the Violence of
the Storm, the finest Spire in that County, and but new built, _viz._
within thirty Years, was overthrown, and fell upon the Church. The
Letter is sign'd by the reverend Minister of the Place, and vouched by
two of the principal Inhabitants, as follows.

    _SIR_,

    Having seen an Advertisement of a Design to perpetuate the
    Remembrance of the late dreadful Storm, by publishing a Collection
    of all the remarkable Accidents occasion'd by it, and supposing the
    Damage done to our Church to be none of the least, we were willing
    to contribute something to your Design, by sending you an Account
    thereof as follows.

    We had formerly a Spire of Timber covered with Lead, of the height
    of 77 Foot; which being in danger of falling, was taken down: and in
    the Year 1674, with the Addition of 10 Loads of new Timber, 21
    thousand and 8 hundred weight of Lead, a new one was erected, 100
    Foot high from the Steeple, with a Gallery at the height of 40 Foot
    all open, wherein hung a Clock-Bell of between 2 and 3 hundred
    Weight. The Spire stood but 8 Yards above the Roof of the Church;
    and yet by the extreme Violence of the Storm, a little before 6 in
    the Morning the Spire was thrown down; and carrying with it all the
    Battlements on the East side, it fell upon the Church at the
    distance of 28 Foot; for so much is the distance between the Steeple
    and the first Breach, which is on the North-side of the middle Roof,
    of the length of 17 Foot, where it brake down 9 Spars clean, each 23
    Foot long, and severally supported with very strong Braces. The
    Spire inclining to the North, fell cross the middle Wall, and broke
    off at the Gallery, the lower part falling in at the aforesaid
    Breach, and the upper upon the North Isle, which is 24 Foot wide,
    with a flat Roof lately built, all new and very strong: It carried
    all before it from side to side, making a Breach 37 Foot long,
    breaking in sunder two large Beams that went a-cross, which were 12
    Inches broad and 15 deep, besides several other smaller. Besides
    these two Breaches, there is a great deal of Damage done by the Fall
    of great Stones upon other parts of the Roof, as well as by the
    Wind's riving up the Lead, and a third part of the Pews broken all
    in pieces, every thing falling into the Church, except the
    Weather-cock, which was found in the Church-yard, at a considerable
    distance, in the great Path that goes cross by the East End of the
    Church. It will cost above 400 _l._ to make all good as it was
    before. There were 3 single Chimneys blown down, and a Stack of 4
    more together, all about the same time; and some others so shaken,
    that they were forc'd to be pull'd down; but, we thank God, no body
    hurt, tho' one Bed was broken in pieces that was very oft lain in:
    no body lay in it that Night. Most Houses suffered something in
    their Tiling, and generally all round the Country, there is
    incredible Damage done to Churches, Houses, and Barns.

      _Samuel Farr_, Vicar.
      _John Gaudy._
      _William Garrard._

From _Oxfordshire_ we have an Account very authentick, and yet
unaccountably strange: but the reverend Author of the Story being a
Gentleman whose Credit we cannot dispute, in acknowledgment to his
Civility, and for the Advantage of our true Design, we give his Letter
also _verbatim_.

    _SIR_,

    Meeting with an Advertisement of yours in the _Gazette_ of _Monday_
    last, I very much approved of the Design, thinking it might be a
    great Motive towards making People, when they hear the Fate of
    others, return Thanks to Almighty God for his Providence in
    preserving them. I accordingly was resolved to send you all I knew.
    The Place where I have for some time lived is _Besselsleigh_, in
    _Barkshire_, about four Miles S.W. of _Oxon_. The Wind began with
    us much about One of the Clock in the Morning, and did not do much
    harm, only in untiling Houses, blowing down a Chimney or two,
    without any Person hurt, and a few Trees: but what was the only
    thing that was strange, and to be observed, was a very tall Elm,
    which was found the next Morning standing, but perfectly twisted
    round; the Root a little loosen'd, but not torn up. But what
    happened the Afternoon preceding, is abundantly more surprizing, and
    is indeed the Intent of this Letter.

    On _Friday_ the 26th of _November_, in the Afternoon, about Four of
    the Clock, a Country Fellow came running to me in a great Fright,
    and very earnestly entreated me to go and see a Pillar, as he call'd
    it, in the Air, in a Field hard by. I went with the Fellow; and when
    I came, found it to be a Spout marching directly with the Wind: and
    I can think of nothing I can compare it to better than the Trunk of
    an Elephant, which it resembled, only much bigger. It was extended
    to a great Length, and swept the Ground as it went, leaving a Mark
    behind. It crossed a Field; and what was very strange (and which I
    should scarce have been induced to believe had I not my self seen
    it, besides several Country-men who were astonish'd at it) meeting
    with an Oak that stood towards the middle of the Field snapped the
    Body of it asunder. Afterwards crossing a Road, it sucked up the
    Water that was in the Cart-ruts: then coming to an old Barn, it
    tumbled it down, and the Thatch that was on the Top was carried
    about by the Wind, which was then very high, in great confusion.
    After this I followed it no farther, and therefore saw no more of
    it. But a Parishoner of mine going from hence to _Hinksey_, in a
    Field about a quarter of a Mile off of this Place, was on the sudden
    knock'd down, and lay upon the Place till some People came by and
    brought him home; and he is not yet quite recovered. Having
    examined him, by all I can collect both from the Time, and Place,
    and Manner of his being knock'd down, I must conclude it was done by
    the Spout, which, if its Force had not been much abated, had
    certainly kill'd him: and indeed I attribute his Illness more to the
    Fright, than the sudden Force with which he was struck down.

    I will not now enter into a Dissertation on the Cause of Spouts, but
    by what I can understand they are caused by nothing but the
    Circumgyration of the Clouds, made by two contrary Winds meeting in
    a Point, and condensing the Cloud till it falls in the Shape we see
    it; which by the twisting Motion sucks up Water, and doth much
    Mischief to Ships at Sea, where they happen oftner than at Land.
    Whichever of the two Winds prevails, as in the above-mentioned was
    the S.W. at last dissolves and dissipates the Cloud, and then the
    Spout disappears.

    This is all I have to communicate to you, wishing you all imaginable
    Success in your Collection. Whether you insert this Account, I leave
    wholly to your own Discretion; but can assure you, that to most of
    these things, tho' very surprizing, I was my self an Eye-witness. I
    am,

      SIR,
        _Your humble Servant_,
      _Dec._ 12. 1703.   Joseph Ralton.

The judicious Reader will observe here, that this strange Spout, or
Cloud, or what else it may be call'd, was seen the Evening before the
great Storm: from whence is confirm'd what I have said before of the
violent Agitation of the Air for some time before the Tempest.

A short, but very regular Account, from _Northampton_, the Reader may
take in the following Letter; the Person being of undoubted Credit and
Reputation in the Town, and the Particulars very well worth remark.

    _SIR_,

    Having seen in the _Gazette_ an Intimation, that there would be a
    Memorial drawn up of the late terrible Wind, and the Effects of it,
    and that the Composer desired Informations from credible Persons,
    the better to enable him to do the same, I thought good to intimate
    what happen'd in this Town, and its Neighbourhood. 1. The
    Weather-cock of _All-Saints_ Church being placed on a mighty Spindle
    of Iron, was bowed together, and made useless. Many Sheets of Lead
    on that Church, as also on St. _Giles_'s and St. _Sepulchres_,
    rowled up like a Scroll. Three Windmills belonging to the Town blown
    down, to the Amazement of all Beholders; the mighty upright Post
    below the Floor of the Mills being snapt in two like a Reed. Two
    entire Stacks of Chimneys in a House uninhabited fell on two several
    Roofs, and made a most amazing Ruin in the Chambers, Floors, and
    even to the lower Windows and Wainscot, splitting and tearing it as
    if a Blow by Gun-powder had happen'd. The Floods at this instant
    about the South Bridge, from a violent S.W. Wind, rose to a great
    and amazing height; the Wind coming over or a-thwart large open
    Meadows, did exceeding damage in that part of the Town, by blowing
    down some whole Houses, carrying whole Roofs at once into the
    Streets, and very many lesser Buildings of Tanners, Fell-mongers,
    Dyers, Glue-makers, _&c._ yet, through the Goodness of God, no
    Person killed or maimed: the mighty Doors of the Sessions-house,
    barr'd and lock'd, forced open, whereby the Wind entring, made a
    miserable Havock of the large and lofty Windows: a Pinnacle on the
    _Guild-hall_, with the Fane, was also blown down. To speak of Houses
    shatter'd, Corn-ricks and Hovels blown from their Standings, would
    be endless. In Sir _Thomas Samwell_'s Park a very great headed Elm
    was blown over the Park-Wall into the Road, and yet never touched
    the Wall, being carried some Yards. I have confined my self to this
    Town. If the Composer finds any thing agreeable to his Design, he
    may use it or dismiss it at his Discretion. Such Works of Providence
    are worth recording. I am

      _Your loving Friend,_
    _Northampton_,
    Dec. 12. 1703.       Ben. Bullivant.

The following Account from _Berkly_ and other Places in
_Gloucestershire_ and _Somersetshire_, &c. are the sad Effects of the
prodigious Tide in the _Severn_. The Wind blowing directly into the
Mouth of that Channel we call the _Severn_ Sea, forced the Waters up in
such quantity, that 'tis allow'd the Flood was eight Foot higher than
ever was known in the Memory of Man; and at one Place, near _Huntspill_,
it drove several Vessels a long way upon the Land; from whence, no
succeeding Tide rising to near that height, they can never be gotten
off: as will appear in the two following Letters.

    _SIR_,

    This Parish is a very large one in the County of _Gloucester_, on
    one Side whereof runneth the River _Severn_, which by Reason of the
    Violence of the late Storm beat down and tore to pieces the Sea Wall
    (which is made of great Stones, and Sticks which they call Rouses; a
    Yard and half long, about the Bigness of ones Thigh rammed into the
    Ground as firm as possible) in many Places, and levell'd it almost
    with the Ground, forcing vast Quantities of Earth a great Distance
    from the Shore, and Stones, many of which were above a Hundred
    Weight: and hereby the _Severn_ was let in above a Mile over one
    part of the Parish, and did great Damage to the Land; it carried
    away one House which was by the Sea-side, and a Gentleman's Stable,
    wherein was a Horse, into the next Ground; and then the Stable fell
    to pieces, and so the Horse came out. There is one thing more
    remarkable in this Parish, and 'tis this: Twenty Six Sheets of Lead,
    hanging all together, were blown off from the middle Isle of our
    Church, and were carried over the North Isle, which is a very large
    one, without touching it; and into the Church-yard ten Yards distant
    from the Church; and they were took up all joyned together as they
    were on the Roof; the Plummer told me that the Sheets weighed each
    Three Hundred and a half one with another. This is what is most
    observable in our Parish; but I shall give you an Account of one
    thing (which perhaps you may have from other Hands) that happen'd in
    another, call'd _Kingscote_, a little Village about Three Miles from
    _Tedbury_, and Seven from us; where _William Kingscote_ Esq; has
    many Woods; among which was one Grove of very tall Trees, being each
    near Eighty Foot high; the which he greatly valued for the Tallness
    and Prospect of them, and therefore resolv'd never to cut them down:
    But it so happen'd, that Six Hundred of them, within the Compass of
    Five Acres were wholly blown down; (and suppos'd to be much at the
    same time) each Tree tearing up the Ground with its Root; so that
    the Roots of most of the Trees, with the Turf and Earth about them,
    stood up at least Fifteen or Sixteen Foot high; the lying down of
    which Trees is an amazing Sight to all Beholders. This Account was
    given by the Gentleman himself, whom I know very well. I have no
    more to add, but that I am, _Your humble Servant_, wishing you good
    Success in your Undertaking,

      _Henry Head_, Vicar of _Berkly_.

    Jan. 24.

    The Damage of the Sea-wall may amount to about five Hundred Pounds.


    _SIR_,

    I Received a printed Paper sometime since, wherein I was desired to
    send you an Account of what happen'd in the late Storm: and I should
    have answered it sooner, but was willing to make some Enquiry first
    about this County; and by what I can hear or learn, the dismal
    Accident of our late Bishop and Lady was most remarkable; who was
    killed by the Fall of two Chimney Stacks, which fell on the Roof,
    and drove it in upon my Lord's Bed, forced it quite through the next
    Flower down into the Hall, and buried them both in the Rubbish; and
    'tis suppos'd my Lord was getting up, for he was found some Distance
    from my Lady, who was found in her Bed; but my Lord had his Morning
    Gown on, so that 'tis suppos'd he was coming from the Bed just as it
    fell. We had likewise two small Houses blown flat down just as the
    People were gone out to a Neighbour's House; and several other
    Chimney Stacks fell down, and some through the Roof, but no other
    Accident as to Death in this Town or near it: abundance of Tiles are
    blown off, and likewise Thatch in and about this Town, and several
    Houses uncover'd, in the Country all about us, abundance of Apple
    and Elm Trees are rooted up by the Ground; and also abundance of
    Wheat and Hay-mows blown down: at _Huntspil_, about twelve Miles
    from this Town, there was Four or Five small Vessels drove a-shoar
    which remain there still, and 'tis suppos'd cannot be got off; and
    in the same Parish, the Tide broke in Breast high; but all the
    People escap'd only one Woman, who was drowned. These are all the
    remarkable Things that happen'd near us, as I can hear of; and is
    all, but my humble Service; and beg Leave to subscribe my self,

      SIR,
        _Your most humble Servant_,
    _Wells_ in _Somersetshire_,
    Feb. 9. 1703.        Edith. Conyers.


    _SIR_,

    The Dreadful Storm did this Church but little Damage, but our Houses
    were terribly shaken hereabouts, and the Tide drowned the greatest
    part of the Sheep on our Common; as it likewise did, besides many
    Cows, between this Place and _Bristol_; on the opposite Shore of
    _Glamorganshire_, as (I suppose you may also know) it brake down
    part of _Chepstow_ Bridge, o'er the _Wye_. In the midst of this
    Church-yard grew a vast Tree, thought to be the most large and
    flourishing Elm in the Land which was torn up by the Roots, some of
    which are really bigger than ones Middle, and several than a Man's
    Thigh; the Compass of them curiously interwoven with the Earth,
    being from the Surface (or Turf) to the Basis, full an Ell in Depth,
    and Eighteen Foot and half in the Diameter, and yet thrown up near
    Perpendicular; the Trunk, together with the loaden Roots, is well
    judg'd to be Thirteen Tun at least, and the Limbs to make Six Load
    of Billets with Faggots; and, about Two Years since, our Minister
    observ'd, that the circumambient Boughs dropt round above Two
    Hundred Yards: He hath given it for a SINGERS SEAT in our said
    Church, with this Inscription thereon; _Nov. 27. A.D._ 1703.
    _Miserere_, &c.

    _Slimbrige near Severn_
    Dec. 28. 1703.     _William Frith_ Church-Warden.


    _SIR_,

    By the late Dreadful Storm a considerable Breach was made in our
    Town Wall, and Part of the Church Steeple blown down; besides most
    of the Inhabitants suffered very much by untiling their Houses,
    _&c._ and abundance of Trees unrooted: at the same time our River
    overflowed, and drowned the low Grounds of both Sides the Town,
    whereby several Hundreds of Sheep were lost, and some Cattle; and
    one of our Market Boats lifted upon our Key. This is a true Account
    of most of our Damages. I am,

      _Your humble Servant_,
    _Cardiff_,
    Jan. 10. 1703.     William Jones.


    _Honour'd Sir_,

    In Obedience to your Request I have here sent you a particular
    Account of the damages sustain'd in our Parish by the late Violent
    Storm; and because that of our Church is the most material which I
    have to impart to you, I shall therefore begin with it. It is the
    fineness of our Church which magnifies our present loss, for in the
    whole it is a large and noble structure, compos'd within and without
    of Ashler curiously wrought, and consisting of a stately Roof in the
    middle, and two Isles runing a considerable length from one end of
    it to the other, makes a very beautiful Figure. It is also adorn'd
    with 28 admired and Celebrated Windows, which, for the variety and
    fineness of the Painted Glass that was in them, do justly attract
    the Eyes of all curious Travellers to inspect and behold them; nor
    is it more famous for its Glass, than newly renown'd for the Beauty
    of its Seats and Paving, both being chiefly the noble Gift of that
    pious and worthy Gentleman _Andrew Barker_, Esq; the late Deceas'd
    Lord of the Mannor. So that all things consider'd, it does equal, at
    least, if not exceed, any Parochial Church in _England_. Now that
    part of it which most of all felt the fury of the Winds, was, a
    large middle West Window, in Dimension about 15 Foot wide, and 25
    Foot high: it represents the general Judgment, and is so fine a
    piece of Art, that 1500 _l._ has formerly been bidden for it, a
    price, though very tempting, yet were the Parishoners so just and
    honest as to refuse it. The upper part of this Window, just above
    the place where our Saviour's Picture is drawn sitting on a Rainbow,
    and the Earth his Foot-stool, is entirely ruin'd, and both sides are
    so shatter'd and torn, especially the left, that upon a general
    Computation, a fourth part, at least, is blown down and destroy'd.
    The like Fate has another West Window on the left side of the
    former, in Dimension about 10 Foot broad, and 15 Foot high,
    sustain'd; the upper half of which is totally broke, excepting one
    Stone Munnel. Now if this were but ordinary Glass, we might quickly
    compute what our repairs would Cost, but we the more lament our
    misfortune herein, because the Paint of these two, as of all the
    other Windows in our Church, is stain'd thro' the Body of the Glass;
    so that if that be true which is generally said, that this Art is
    lost, then have we an irretrievable loss. There are other damages
    about our Church, which, tho' not so great as the former, do yet as
    much testify how strong and boisterous the Winds were, for they
    unbedded 3 Sheets of Lead upon the uppermost Roof, and roll'd them
    up like so much Paper. Over the Church-porch, a large Pinnacle and
    two Battlements were blown down upon the leads of it, but resting
    there, and their fall being short, these will be repair'd with
    little Cost. This is all I have to say concerning our Church: Our
    Houses come next to be considered, and here I may tell you, that
    (thanks be to God) the effects of the Storm were not so great as
    they have been in many other places; several Chimneys, and Tiles,
    and Slats, were thrown down, but no body kill'd or wounded. Some of
    the Poor, because their Houses were Thatch'd, were the greatest
    sufferers; but to be particular herein, would be very frivolous, as
    well as vexatious. One Instance of Note ought not to omitted; on
    _Saturday_ the 26th, being the day after the Storm, about 2-a-Clock
    in the Afternoon, without any previous warning, a sudden flash of
    Lightning, with a short, but violent clap of Thunder, immediately
    following it like the Discharge of Ordnance, fell upon a new and
    strong built House in the middle of our Town, and at the same time
    disjointed two Chimneys, melted some of the Lead of an upper Window,
    and struck the Mistress of the House into a Swoon, but this, as
    appear'd afterwards, prov'd the effect more of fear, than of any
    real considerable hurt to be found about her. I have nothing more
    to add, unless it be the fall of several Trees and Ricks of Hay
    amongst us, but these being so common every where, and not very many
    in number here, I shall Conclude this tedious Scrible, and Subscribe
    my self,

    _SIR_,
      _Your most Obedient and Humble Servant_,
    Fairford, Gloucest.
    _January_ 1703/4.       Edw. Shipton, _Vic._

_The following Letters, tho' in a homely stile, are written by very
honest, plain and observing Persons, to whom entire Credit may be
given._

_BREWTON._

    _SIR_,

    Some time since I received a Letter from you, to give you an Account
    of the most particular Things that hapned in the late dreadful
    Tempest of Wind, and in the first Place is the Copy of a Letter from
    a Brother of mine, that was an Exciseman of _Axbridge_, in the West
    of our County of _Somerset_; these are his Words,

    What I know of the Winds in these Parts, are, that it broke down
    many Trees, and that the House of one _Richard Henden_; of
    _Charter-House_ on _Mendip_, call'd _Piney_, was almost blown down,
    and in saving their House, they, and the Servants, and others, heard
    grievous Cries and Scrieches in the Air. The Tower of _Compton
    Bishop_ was much shatter'd, and the Leads that cover'd it were taken
    clean away, and laid flat in the Church-Yard: The House of _John
    Cray_ of that place, received much and strange Damages, which
    together with his part in the Sea-wall, amounted to 500 _l._ Near
    the Salt-works in the Parish of _Burnham_, was driven five trading
    Vessels, as Colliers and Corn-dealers, betwixt _Wales_ and
    _Bridgwater_, at least 100 Yards on Pasture Ground. In the North
    Marsh, on the sides of _Bristol_ River, near _Ken_ at _Walton
    Woodspring_, the Waters broke with such Violence, that it came six
    Miles into the Country drowning much Cattel, carrying away several
    Hay-ricks and Stacks of Corn: And at a Farm at _Churchill_ near
    _Wrington_, it blew down 150 Elms that grew most in Rows, and were
    laid as Uniform as Soldiers lodge their Arms.

    At _Cheddar_ near _Axbridge_, was much harm done in Apple-trees,
    Houses, and such like; but what's worth remark, tho' not the very
    Night of the Tempest, a Company of wicked People being at a Wedding
    of one _Thomas Marshall_, _John_, the Father of the said _Thomas_,
    being as most of the Company was very Drunk, after much filthy
    Discourse while he was eating, a strange Cat pulling something from
    his Trenchard, he Cursing her, stoopt to take it up, and died
    immediately.

    At _Brewton_ what was most Remarkable, was this, that one _John
    Dicer_ of that Town, lay the Night as the Tempest was, in the Barn
    of one _John Seller_, the Violence of the Wind broke down the Roof
    of the Barn, but fortunately for him there was a Ladder which staid
    up a Rafter, which would have fell upon the said _John Dicer_; but
    he narrowly escaping being killed, did slide himself thro' the
    broken Roof, and so got over the Wall without any great hurt. What
    hurt was done more about that Town is not so considerable as in
    other Places; Such as blowing off the Thatch from a great many back
    Houses of the Town; for the Town is most tiled with a sort of heavy
    Tile, that the Wind had no power to move; there was some hurt done
    to the Church, which was not above 40_s._ besides the Windows, where
    was a considerable damage, the Lady _Fitzharding_'s House standing
    by the Church, the Battlement with part of the Wall of the House was
    blown down, which 'tis said, above 20 Men with all their strength
    could not have thrown down; besides, a great many Trees in the Park
    torn up by the Roots, and laid in very good Order one after another;
    it was taken notice that the Wind did not come in a full Body at
    once, but it came in several Gusts, as my self have taken Notice as
    I rid the Country, that in half a Miles riding I could not see a
    Tree down, nor much hurt to Houses, then again I might for some
    space see the Trees down, and all the Houses shattred: and I have
    taken Notice that it run so all up the Country in such a Line as the
    Wind sat; about One of the Clock it turn'd to the North West, but at
    the beginning was at South West; I my self was up until One and then
    I went to Bed, but the highest of the Wind was after that, so that
    my Bed did shake with me.

       *       *       *       *       *

    What was about _Wincanton_, was, that one Mrs. _Gapper_ had 36
    Elm-trees growing together in a Row, 35 of them was blown down; and
    one _Edgehill_ of the same Town, and his Family being a Bed did
    arise, hearing the House begin to Crak, and got out of the Doors
    with his whole Family, and as soon as they were out the Roof of the
    House fell in, and the Violence of the Wind took of the Children's
    Head-cloaths, that they never saw them afterwards.

       *       *       *       *       *

    At _Evercreech_, three Miles from _Brewton_, there were a poor Woman
    beg'd for Lodging in the Barn of one _Edmond Peny_ that same Night
    that the Storm was, she was wet the Day before in Travelling, so she
    hung up her Cloaths in the Barn, and lay in the Straw; but when the
    Storm came it blew down the Roof of the Barn where she lay, and she
    narrowly escaped with her Life, being much bruised, and got out
    almost naked through the Roof where it was broken most, and went to
    the dwelling House of the said _Edmond Peny_, and they did arise,
    and did help her to something to cover her, till they could get out
    her Cloaths; that place of _Evercreech_ received a great deal of
    hurt in their Houses, which is too large to put here.

       *       *       *       *       *

    At _Batcomb_ Easterly of _Evercreech_, they had a great deal of
    Damage done as I said before, it lay exactly with the Wind from
    _Evercreech_, and both places received a great deal of Damage; there
    was one Widow _Walter_ lived in a House by it self, the Wind carried
    away the Roof, and the Woman's pair of Bodice, that was never heard
    of again, and the whole Family escaped narrowly with their Lives;
    all the Battlements of the Church on that side of the Tower next to
    the Wind was blown in, and a great deal of Damage done to the
    Church.

    At _Shipton Mallet_ was great Damages done, as I was told by the
    Post that comes to _Brewton_, that the Tiles of the Meeting House
    was blown off, and being a sort of light Tiles they flew against the
    Neighbouring Windows, and broke them to pieces: And at _Chalton_
    near _Shepton Mallet_ at one _Abbot_'s, the Roof was carried from
    the Walls of the House and the House mightily shaken, and seemingly
    the Foundation removed, and in the Morning they found a Foundation
    Stone of the House upon the top of the Wall, where was a shew in the
    Ground of its being driven out. At _Dinder_ within two Miles of
    _Shepton_, there was one _John Allen_, and his Son, being out of
    Doors in the midst of the Tempest, they saw a great Body of Fire
    flying on the side of a Hill, call'd _Dinder-hill_, about half a
    Mile from them, with a Shew of black in the midst of it, and another
    Body of Fire following it, something smaller than the former.

    There has been a strange thing at _Butly_, eight Miles from
    _Brewton_, which was thought to be Witchcraft, where a great many
    unusual Things happened to one _Pope_, and his Family, especially to
    a Boy, that was his Son, that having lain several Hours Dead, when
    he came to himself, he told his Father, and several of his
    Neighbours, Strange Stories of his being carried away by some of his
    Neighbours that have been counted wicked Persons; the Things have
    been so strangely related that Thousands of People have gone to see
    and hear it; it lasted about a Year or more: But since the Storm I
    have inquired of the Neighbours how it was, and they tell me, that
    since the late Tempest of Wind the House and People have been quiet;
    for its generally said, that there was some Conjuration in quieting
    of that House. If you have a desire to hear any farther Account of
    it, I will make it my Business to inquire farther of it, for there
    were such. Things happened in that time which is seldom heard of,

      _Your humble Servant_
                          Hu. Ash.

    _Our Town of_ Butly _lyes in such a place, that no Post-House is in
    a great many Miles of it, or you should hear oftner._


    _SIR_,

    I received yours, desiring an Account of the Damage done by the late
    great Wind about us. At _Wilsnorton_, three Miles from _Wittney_,
    the Lead of the Church was rouled, and great Damage done to the
    Church, many great Elms were tore up by the Roots: At _Helford_, two
    Miles from us, a Rookery of Elms, was most of it tore up by the
    Roots: At _Cockeup_, two Miles from us, was a Barn blown down, and
    several Elms blown down a Cross the High-way, so that there was no
    passage; a great Oak of about nine or ten Loads was blown down,
    having a Raven sitting in it, his Wing-feathers got between two
    Bows, and held him fast; but the Raven received no hurt: At
    _Duckelton_, a little thatch't House was taken off the
    Ground-pening, and removed a distance from the place, the covering
    not damaged. Hay-recks abundance are torn to pieces: At _Wittney_,
    six Stacks of Chimneys blown down, one House had a sheet of Lead
    taken from one side and blown over to the other, and many Houses
    were quite torn to pieces; several Hundred Trees blown down, some
    broke in the middle, and some torn up by the Roots. Blessed be God,
    I hear neither Man, Woman nor Child that received any harm about us.

      _Your Servant_,
    _Wittney, Oxfordsh._   Richard Abenell.


_ILMISTER, Somerset_

_Brief but exact Remarks on the late Dreadful Storms of Wind, as it
affected the Town, and the Parts adjacent._

    _Imprimus._ At _Ashil_-Parish 3 Miles West from this Town, the
    Stable belonging to the Hare and Hounds Inn was blown down, in which
    were three Horses, one kill'd, another very much bruised.

    2. At _Jurdans_, a Gentleman's Seat in the same Parish, there was a
    Brick Stable, whose Roof, one Back, and one End Wall, were all
    thrown down, and four foot in depth of the Fore Wall; in this Stable
    were 4 Horses, which by reason of the Hay-loft that bore up the
    Roof, were all preserv'd.

    3. At _Sevington_ Parish, three Miles East from this Town, _John_
    Hutkens had the Roof of a new built House heaved clean off the
    Walls. _Note_, the House was not glazed, and the Roof was thatch'd.

    4. In _White Larkington_ Park, a Mile East from this Town, besides
    four or five hundred tall Trees broken and blown down, (admirable to
    behold, what great Roots was turned up) there were three very large
    Beaches, two of them that were near five Foot thick in the Stem were
    broken off, one of them near the Root, the other was broken off
    twelve Foot above, and from that place down home to the Root was
    shattered and flown; the other that was not broken, cannot have less
    than forty Waggon Loads in it; a very fine Walk of Trees before the
    House all blown down, and broke down the Roof of a Pidgeon House,
    the Rookery carried away in Lanes, the Lodg-House damaged in the
    Roof, and one End by the fall of Trees. In the Garden belonging to
    the House, was a very fine Walk of tall Firrs, twenty of which were
    broken down.

    5. The damage in the Thatch of Houses, (which is the usual Covering
    in these Parts) is so great and general, that the price of Reed
    arose from twenty Shillings to fifty or three Pounds a Hundred;
    insomuch that to shelter themselves from the open Air, many poor
    People were glad to use Bean, Helm and Furse, to thatch their Houses
    with, Things never known to be put to such Use before.

    6. At _Kingston_, a Mile distance from this Town, the Church was
    very much shattered in its Roof, and Walls too, and all our Country
    Churches much shattered, so that Churches and Gentlemen's Houses
    which were tiled, were so shatter'd in their Roofs, that at present,
    they are generally patch'd with Reed, not in Compliance with the
    Mode, but the Necessity of the Times.

    7. At _Broadway_, two Miles West of this Town, _Hugh Betty_, his
    Wife, and four Children being in his House, it was by the violence
    of the Storm blown down, one of his Children killed, his Wife
    wounded, but recovered, the rest escaped with their Lives. A large
    Alms-house had most of the Tile blown off, and other Houses much
    shattered; a very large Brick Barn blown down, Walls and Roof to the
    Ground.

    8. Many large Stacks of Wheat were broken, some of the Sheaves
    carried two or three Hundred Yards from the Place, many Stacks of
    Hay turned over, some Stacks of Corn heaved off the Stadle, and set
    down on the Ground, and not broken.

    9. _Dowlish Walk_, two Miles South East, the Church was very much
    shattered, several Load of Stones fell down, not as yet repair'd,
    therefore can't express the damage. A very large Barn broken down
    that stood near the Church, much damage was done to Orchards, not
    only in this Place, but in all places round, some very fine Orchards
    quite destroyed: some to their great Cost had the Trees set up right
    again, but a Storm of Wind came after, which threw down many of the
    Trees again; as to Timber Trees, almost all our high Trees were
    broken down in that violent Storm.

    10. In this Town _Henry Dunster_, his Wife and 2 Children, was in
    their House when it was blown down, but they all escaped with their
    Lives, only one of them had a small Bruise with a piece of Timber,
    as she was going out of the Chamber when the Roof broke in.

    The Church, in this Place, scap'd very well, as to its Roof, being
    cover'd with Lead only on the Chancel; the Lead was at the top of
    the Roof heaved up, and roll'd together, more than ten Men could
    turn back again, without cutting the Sheets of Lead, which was done
    to put it in its place again: But in general the Houses much broken
    and shatter'd, besides the fall of some.

    This is a short, but true Account. I have heard of several other
    things which I have not mentioned, because I could not be positive
    in the truth of them, unless I had seen it. This is what I have been
    to see the truth of. You may enlarge on these short Heads, and
    methodize 'em as you see good.

    At _Henton St. George_, at the Lord _Pawlet_'s, a new Brick Wall was
    broken down by the Wind for above 100 foot, the Wall being built not
    above 2 years since, as also above 60 Trees near 100 foot high.

    At _Barrington_, about 2 miles North of this Town, there was blown
    down above eight-score Trees, being of an extraordinary height, at
    the Lady _Strouds._

_As we shall not crow'd our Relation with many Letters from the same
places, so it cannot be amiss to let the World have, at least, one
Authentick Account from most of those Places where any Capital Damages
have been sustain'd and to summ up the rest in a general Head at the end
of this Chapter._

_From_ Wiltshire _we have the following Account from the Reverend the
Minister of Upper_ Donhead _near_ Shaftsbury; _to which the Reader is
referr'd as follows._

    _SIR_,

    As the Undertaking you are engag'd in, to preserve the Remembrance
    of the late dreadful Tempest, is very commendable in it self, and
    may in several respects be serviceable not only to the present Age,
    but also to Posterity; so it merits a suitable Encouragement, and,
    'tis hop'd, it will meet with such, from all that have either a true
    sense of Religion, or have had any sensible share of the care of
    Providence over them, or of the goodness of God unto them in the
    Land of the Living, upon that occasion. There are doubtless vast
    numbers of People in all Parts (where the Tempest raged) that have
    the greatest reason (as the Author of this Paper for one hath) to
    bless God for their wonderful preservation, and to tell it to the
    Generation following. But to detain you no longer with Preliminaries,
    I shall give you a faithful Account of what occurr'd in my
    Neighbourhood (according to the Conditions mention'd in the
    Advertisement in the _Gazette_) worthy, at least, of my notice, if
    not of the Undertakers; and I can assure you, that the several
    Particulars were either such as I can vouch-for on my own certain
    Knowledge and Observation, or else such as I am satisfy'd of the
    truth of by the Testimony of others, whose Integrity I have no
    reason to suspect. I will say no more than this in general,
    concerning the Storm, that, at its height, it seem'd, for some
    hours, to be a perfect Hurrican, the Wind raging from every Quarter,
    especially from all the Points of the Compass, from _N.E._ to the
    _N.W._ as the dismal Effects of it in these Parts do evidently
    demonstrate, in the demolishing of Buildings (or impairing 'em at
    best) and in the throwing up vast numbers of Trees by the Roots, or
    snapping them off in their Bodies, or larger Limbs. But as to some
    remarkable Particulars, you may take these following, _viz._

    1. The Parish-Church receiv'd little damage, tho' it stands high,
    the chief was in some of the Windows on the N. side, and in the fall
    of the Top-stone of one of the Pinnacles, which fell on a House
    adjoining to the Tower with little hurt to the Roof, from which
    glancing it rested on the Leads of the South-Isle of the Church. At
    the fall of it an aged Woman living in the said House on which the
    Stone fell, heard horrible Scrieches (as she constantly averrs) in
    the Air, but none before nor afterwards.

    2. Two stone Chimney-tops were thrown down, and 2 broad Stones of
    each of them lay at even poize on the respective ridges of both the
    Houses, and tho' the Wind sat full against one of them to have
    thrown it off, (and then it had fallen over a Door, in and out at
    which several People were passing during the Storm) and tho' the
    other fell against the Wind, yet neither of the said Stones stirr'd.

    3. A Stone of near 400 Weight, having lain about 7 Years under a
    Bank, defended from the Wind as it then sat, tho' it lay so long as
    to be fix'd in the ground, and was as much out of the Wind, as could
    be, being fenced by the Bank, and a low Stone-wall upon the Bank,
    none of which was demolish'd, tho' 2 small Holms standing in the
    Bank between the Wall, and the Stone, at the foot of the Bank were
    blown up by the roots; I say, this Stone, tho' thus fenced from the
    Storm, was carried from the place where it lay, into an hollow-way
    beneath, at least seven Yards from the place, where it was known to
    have lain for 7 Years before.

    4. A Widdow-woman living in one part of an House by her self, kept
    her Bed till the House over her was uncover'd, and she expected the
    fall of the Timber and Walls; but getting below Stairs in the dark,
    and opening the Door to fly for shelter, the Wind was so strong in
    the Door, that she could neither get out at it, tho' she attempted
    to go out on her knees and hands, nor could she shut the Door again
    with all her strength, but was forced to sit alone for several hours
    ('till the Storm slacken'd), fearing every Gust would have buried
    her in the Ruins; and yet it pleas'd God to preserve her, for the
    House (tho' a feeble one) stood over the Storm.

    5. Another, who made Malt in his Barn, had been turning his Malt
    sometime before the Storm was at its height, and another of the
    Family being desirous to go again into the said Barn sometime after,
    was disswaded from it, and immediately thereupon the said Barn was
    thrown down by the Storm.

    6. But a much narrower Escape had one, for whose safety the
    Collector of these Passages has the greatest reason to bless and
    praise the great Preserver of Men, who was twice in his Bed that
    dismal Night (tho' he had warning sufficient to deter him the first
    time by the falling of some of the Seiling on his Back and
    Shoulders, as he was preparing to go to Bed) and was altogether
    insensible of the great danger he was in, 'till the next morning
    after the Day-light appear'd, when he found the Tiles, on the side
    of the House opposite to the main Stress of the Weather, blown up in
    two places, one of which was over his Beds-head (about 9 foot above
    it) in which 2 or 3 Laths being broken, let down a Square of 8 or 10
    Stone Tiles upon one single Lath, where they hung dropping inward a
    little, and bended the Lath like a Bow, but fell not: What the
    consequence of their Fall had been, was obvious to as many as saw
    it, and none has more reason to magnify God's great Goodness, in
    this rescue of his Providence, than the Relater.

    7. A young Man of the same Parish, who was sent abroad to look after
    some black Cattle and Sheep that fed in an Inclosure, in, or near to
    which there were some Stacks of Corn blown down, reports, That tho'
    he had much difficulty to find the Inclosure in the dark, and to get
    thither by reason of the Tempest then raging in the height of its
    fury; yet being there, he saw a mighty Body of Fire on an high ridge
    of Hills, about 3 parts of a Mile from the said Inclosure, which
    gave so clear a Light into the Valley below, as that by it the said
    young Man could distinctly descry all the Sheep and Cattle in the
    said Pasture, so as to perceive there was not one wanting.

    8. At _Ashegrove_, in the same Parish (where many tall Trees were
    standing on the steep side of an Hill) there were two Trees of
    considerable bigness blown up against the side of the Hill, which
    seems somewhat strange, to such as have seen how many are blown, at
    the same place, a quite contrary way, _i.e._ down the Hill; and to
    fall downwards was to fall with the Wind, as upward, was to fall
    against it.

    9. One in this Neighbourhood had a Poplar in his Back-side of near
    16 Yards high blown down, which standing near a small Current of
    Water, the Roots brought up near a Tun of Earth with them, and
    there the Tree lay for some days after the Storm; but when the Top
    or Head of the Tree was saw'd off from the Body (tho' the Boughs
    were nothing to the weight of the But End, yet) the Tree mounted,
    and fell back into it's place, and stood as upright without its Head,
    as ever it had done with it. And the same happen'd at the Lady
    _Banks_ her House near _Shaftsbury_, where a Wall-nut-Tree was
    thrown down in a place that declin'd somewhat, and after the greater
    Limbs had been cut off in the day time, went back in the Night
    following, of it self, and now stands in the same place and posture
    it stood in before it was blown down. I saw it standing the 14th of
    this Instant, and could hardly perceive any Token of its having been
    Down, so very exactly it fell back into its place. This is somewhat
    the more remarkable, because the Ground (as I said) was declining,
    and consequently the Tree raised against the Hill. To this I shall
    only add, at present, that

    10. This Relator lately riding thro' a neighbouring Parish, saw two
    Trees near two Houses thrown besides the said Houses, and very near
    each House, which yet did little or no harm, when if they had fallen
    with the Wind, they must needs have fallen directly upon the said
    Houses. And

    11. That this Relator had two very tall Elms thrown up by the Roots,
    which fell in among five young Walnut Trees, without injuring a Twig
    or Bud of either of them, as rais'd the admiration of such as saw
    it.

    12. In the same place, the Top of another Elm yet standing, was
    carry'd of from the Body of the Tree, a good part of 20 Yards.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _SIR_; I shall trouble you no further at present, you may perhaps
    think this enough, and too much; but however that may be, you, or
    your ingenious Undertakers are left at liberty to publish so much,
    or so little of this Narrative, as shall be thought fit for the
    Service of the Publick. I must confess the particular Deliverances
    were what chiefly induced me to set Pen to Paper, tho' the other
    Matters are Considerable, but whatever regard you shew to the
    latter, in Justice you should publish the former to the World, as
    the Glory of God is therein concern'd more immediately, to promote
    which, is the only aim of this Paper. And the more effectually to
    induce you to do me Right, (for contributing a slender Mite towards
    your very laudable Undertaking) I make no manner of Scruple to
    subscribe my self,

      _Upper Donhead,_      _Sir, Yours,_ &c.
      _Decemb._ 18_th_ 1703.        Rice Adams.
      _Rector of_ Upper Donhead Wilts near _Shaftsbury_.

_From_ Littleton _in_ Worcestershire, _and_ Middleton _in_ Oxfordshire,
_the following Letters may be a Specimen of what those whole Counties
felt, and of which we have several other particular Accounts._

    _SIR_,

    Publick notice being given of a designed Collection of the most
    Prodigious, as well as lamentable Effects of the last dreadful
    Tempest of Wind. There are many Persons hereabouts, and I suppose in
    many other places, wish all speedy furtherance and good Success to
    that so useful and pious Undertaking, for it may very well be
    thought to have a good Influence both upon the present Age, and
    succeeding Generation, to beget in them a holy admiration and fear
    of that tremendous Power and Majesty, which as one Prophet tells us,
    _Causeth the Vapours to ascend from the Ends of the Earth, and
    bringeth the Wind out of his Treasures, and as the Priest Saith,
    hath so done his marvellous Works, that they ought to be had in
    remembrance_. As to these Villages of _Littleton_ in
    _Worcestershire_, I can only give this Information, that this
    violent Hurricane visited us also in its passage to the great Terror
    of the Inhabitants, who although by the gracious Providence of God
    all escaped with their Lives and Limbs, and the main Fabrick of
    their Houses stood; tho' with much shaking, and some damage in the
    Roofs of many of them: Yet when the Morning Light appeared after
    that dismal Night, they were surpris'd with fresh apprehensions of
    the Dangers escaped, when they discover'd the sad Havock that was
    made among the Trees of their Orchards and Closes, very many Fruit
    Trees, and many mighty Elms being torn up, and one Elm above the
    rest, of very great Bulk and ancient Growth I observed, which might
    have defied the Strength of all the Men and Teams in the Parish,
    (tho' assaulted in every Branch with Roaps and Chains) was found
    torn up by the Roots, all sound, and of vast Strength and Thickness,
    and with its fall (as was thought) by the help of the same impetuous
    Gusts, broke off in the middle of the Timber another great Elm its
    Fellow, and next Neighbour. And that which may exercise the Thoughts
    of the Curious, some little Houses and Out-houses that seemed to
    stand in the same Current, and without any visible Burrough or
    Shelter, escaped in their Roofs, without any, or very little Damage:
    What Accidents of Note hapned in our Neighbouring Parishes, I
    suppose you may receive from other Hands. This, (I thank God) is all
    that I have to transmit unto you from this place, but that I am a
    Well-wisher to your Work in Hand, _And your Humble Servant_,

    _Littleton, Decem._ 20.   _Ralph Norris_.


    _Middleton-Stony_ in _Oxfordshire_, Nov. 26. 1703

    The Wind being South West and by West, it began to blow very hard at
    12 of the Clock at Night, and about four or five in the Morning
    _Nov._ 27, the Hurricane was very terrible; many large Trees were
    torn up by the Roots in this Place; the Leads of the Church were
    Roll'd up, the Stone Battlements of the Tower were blown upon the
    Leads, several Houses and Barns were uncover'd, part of a new built
    Wall of Brick, belonging to a Stable was blown down, and very much
    damage, of the like Nature, was done by the Wind in the Towns and
    Villages adjacent.

      _William Offley_, Rector of _Middleton-Stony_.

_From_ Leamington Hasting, _near_ Dun-_Church in_ Warwickshire, _we have
the following Account._

    _SIR_,

    I find in the Advertisments a Desire to have an Account of what
    happen'd remarkable in the late terrible Storm in the Country; the
    Stories every where are very many, and several of them such as will
    scarce gain Credit; one of them I send here an Account of being an
    Eye Witness, and living upon the place: The Storm here began on the
    26th of _Novem._ 1703. about 12-a-clock, but the severest Blasts
    were between 5 and six in the Morning, and between Eight and Nine
    the 27th I went up to the Church, where I found all the middle Isle
    clearly stript of the Lead from one End to the other, and a great
    many of the Sheets lying on the East End upon the Church, roll'd up
    like a piece of Cloth: I found on the Ground six Sheets of Lead, at
    least 50 Hundred weight, all joyn'd together, not the least parted,
    but as they lay upon the Isle, which six Sheets of Lead were so
    carried in the Air by the Wind fifty Yards and a Foot, measured by a
    Workman exactly as cou'd be, from the place of the Isle where they
    lay, to the place they fell; and they might have been carried a
    great way further, had they not happen'd in their way upon a Tree,
    struck off an Arm of it near 17 Yards high; the End of one Sheet was
    twisted round the Body of the Tree, and the rest all joyn'd together
    lay at length, having broke down the Pales first where the Tree
    stood, and lay upon the Pales on the Ground, with one End of them,
    as I said before, round the Body of the Tree.

    At the same time at _Marson_, in the County of _Warwick_, about 4
    Miles from this place, a great Rick of Wheat was blown off from its
    Staddles, and set down without one Sheaf remov'd, or disturb'd, or
    without standing away 20 Yards from the place.

    If you have a mind to be farther satisfied in this Matter, let me
    hear from you, and I will endeavour it: But I am in great hast at
    this time, which forces me to be confus'd.

      _I am your Friend_,
            E. Kingsburgh.

_The following Account we have from_ Fareham _and_ Christ Church _in_
Hampshire, _which are also well attested_.

    _SIR_,

    I received yours, and in Answer these are to acquaint you; That we
    about us came no ways behind the rest of our Neighbours in that
    mighty Storm or Hurricane. As for our own Parish, very few Houses or
    Outhouses escaped. There was in the Parish of _Fareham_ six Barns
    blown down, with divers other Outhouses, and many Trees blown up by
    the Roots, and other broken off in the middle; by the fall of a
    large Elm, a very large Stone Window at the West End of our Church
    was broken down; there was but two Stacks of Chimneys thrown down in
    all our Parish that I know of, and those without hurting any Person.
    There was in a _Coppice_ called _Pupal Coppice_, an Oak Tree, of
    about a Load of Timber, that was twisted off with the Wind, and the
    Body that was left standing down to the very Roots so shivered, that
    if it were cut into Lengths, it would fall all in pieces.
    Notwithstanding so many Trees, and so much Out-Housing was blown
    down, I do not hear of one Beast that was killed or hurt. There was
    on the _Down_ called _Portsdown_, in the Parish of _Southwick_,
    within three Miles of us, a Wind-Mill was blown down, that had not
    been up very many Years, with great damage in the said Parish to Mr.
    _Norton_, by the fall of many Chimneys and Trees. The damage
    sustained by us in the _Healing_ is such, that we are obliged to
    make use of Slit Deals to supply the want of Slats and Tyles until
    Summer come to make some. And so much Thatching wanting, that it
    cannot be all repaired till after another Harvest. As for Sea
    Affairs about us, we had but one Vessel abroad at that time, which
    was one _John Watson_, the Master of which was never heard of yet,
    and I am afraid never will; I have just reason to lament her Loss,
    having a great deal of Goods aboard of her. If at any time any
    particular Relation that is true, come to my knowledge in any
    convenient time, I will not fail to give you an Account, and at all
    times remain

      _Fareham_,               _Your Servant_,
      _January the_ 23_d._ 1703/4.       Hen. Stanton.


    _SIR_,

    In Answer to yours, relating to the Damages done by the late Storm
    in, and about out Town, is, that we had great part of the Roof of
    our Church uncover'd, which was cover'd with very large
    Purbick-stone, and the Battlements of the Tower, and part of the
    Leads blown down, some Stones of a vast weight blown from the
    Tower, several of them between two or three hundred weight, were
    blown some Rods or Perches distance from the Church; and 12 Sheets
    of Lead rouled up together, that 20 Men could not have done the
    like, to the great Amasement of those that saw 'em: And several
    Houses and Barns blown down, with many hundreds of Trees of all
    sorts; several Stacks of Chimneys being blown down, and particularly
    of one _Thomas Spencer_'s of this Town, who had his Top of a Brick
    Chimney taken off by the House, and blown a cross a Cart Road, and
    lighting upon a Barn of _Richard Holloway_'s, broke down the end of
    the said Barn, and fell upright upon one End, on a Mow of Corn in
    the Barn; but the said _Spencer_ and his Wife, al-tho' they were
    then sitting by the Fire, knew nothing thereof until the Morning:
    And a Stack of Chimneys of one Mr. _Imber_'s fell down upon a young
    Gentlewoman's Bed, she having but just before got out of the same,
    and several Outhouses and Stables were blown down, some Cattel
    killed; and some Wheat-ricks entirely blown off their Stafolds; and
    lighted on their bottom without any other damage; this is all the
    Relation I can give you that is Remarkable about us,

      _I remain your friend and Servant_,
                          William Mitchel.

    At _Ringwood_ and _Fording-Bridge_, several Houses and Trees are
    blown down, and many more Houses uncovered.

_From_ Oxford _the following Account was sent, enclosed in the other,
and are confirm'd by Letters from other Hands_.

    _SIR_,

    The inclos'd is a very exact, and I am sure, faithful Account of the
    Damages done by the late Violent Tempest in _Oxford_. The
    particulars of my Lord Bishop of _Bath_ and _Wells_, and his Ladies
    Misfortune are as follows, The Palace is the Relicks of a very old
    decay'd Castle, only one Corner is new built; and had the Bishop had
    the good Fortune to have lain in those Apartments that Night, he
    had sav'd his Life. He perceiv'd the fall before it came, and
    accordingly jump't out of Bed, and made towards the Door, where he
    was found with his Brains dash'd out; his Lady perceiving it, wrapt
    all the Bed-cloaths about her, and in that manner was found
    smother'd in Bed. This account is Authentick,

      _I am, Sir, yours_,
    Dec. 9. 1703.     J. Bagshot.


    _SIR_,

    I give you many thanks for your account from _London_: We were no
    less terrified in _Oxon_ with the Violence of the Storm, tho' we
    suffer'd in comparison but little Damage. The most considerable was,
    a Child kill'd in St. _Giles_'s by the fall of an House; two
    Pinnacles taken off from the Top of _Magdalen_ Tower, one from
    _Merton_; about 12 Trees blown down in _Christ_ Church long walk,
    some of the Battlements from the Body of the Cathedral, and two or
    three Ranges of Rails on the Top of the great Quadrangle: Part of
    the great Elm in University Garden was blown off, and a Branch of
    the Oak in _Magdalen_ walks; the rest of the Colleges scaped
    tolerably well, and the Schools and Theatre intirely. A very
    remarkable passage happened at Queen's College, several Sheets of
    Lead judged near 6000 _l._ weight, were taken off from the Top of
    Sir _J. Williamson_'s Buildings, and blown against the West-end of
    St. Peter's Church with such Violence, that they broke an Iron-bar
    in the Window, making such a prodigious Noise with the fall, that
    some who heard it, thought the Tower had been falling. The rest of
    our Losses consisted for the most part in Pinnacles, Chimneys,
    Trees, Slates, Tiles, Windows, _&c._ amounting in all, according to
    Computation, to not above 1000 _l._

  _Ox. Dec._ 7. 1703.

_From_ Kingstone-upon-Thames, _the following Letter is very particular,
and the truth of it may be depended upon_.

    _SIR_,

    I have inform'd my self of the following Matters; here was blown
    down a Stack of Chimneys of Mrs. _Copper_, Widow, which fell on the
    Bed, on which she lay; but she being just got up, and gone down, she
    received no harm on her Body: Likewise, here was a Stack of Chimnies
    of one Mr. _Robert Banford_'s blown down, which fell on a Bed, on
    which his Son and Daughter lay, he was about 14 years and the
    Daughter 16; but they likewise were just got down Stairs, and
    received no harm: A Stack of Chimnies at the _Bull-Inn_ was blown
    down, and broke way down into the Kitchen, but hurt no Body: Here
    was a new Brick Malt-House of one Mr. _Francis Best_ blown down, had
    not been built above two Years, blown off at the second Floor:
    besides many Barns, and out Houses; and very few Houses in the Town
    but lost Tiling, some more, some less, and Multitudes of Trees, in
    particular. 11 Elms of one Mr. _John Bowles_, Shooe-maker: About 30
    Apple-trees of one _Mr. Peirce_'s: And of one _John Andrew_, a
    Gardiner, 100 Apple-trees blown to the Ground: One _Walter Kent_,
    Esq; had about 20 Rod of new Brick-wall of his Garden blown down:
    One Mr. _Tiringam_, Gentleman, likewise about 10 Rod of new
    Brick-wall blown down: Mr. _George Cole_, Merchant, had also some
    Rods of new Brickwall blown down: Also Mr. _Blitha_, Merchant, had
    all his Walling blown down, and other extraordinary Losses. These
    are the most considerable Damages done here,

      _Your humble Servant_,
                          C. Castleman.

_From_ Teuxbury _in_ Gloucestershire, _and from_ Hatfield _in_
Hertfordshire, _the following Letters are sent us from the Ministers of
the respective Places._

    _SIR_,

    Our Church, tho' a very large one, suffered no great discernable
    Damage. The Lead Roof, by the force of the Wind was strangely
    ruffled, but was laid down without any great cost or trouble. Two
    well-grown Elms, that stood before a sort of Alms-house in the
    Church-yard had a different Treatment; the one was broken short in
    the Trunck, and the head turn'd Southward, the other tore up by the
    Roots, and cast Northward: Divers Chimnies were blown down, to the
    great Damage and Consternation of the Inhabitants: And one rising in
    the middle of two Chambers fell so violently, that it broke thro'
    the Roof and Cieling of the Chamber, and fell by the Bed of Mr.
    _W.M._ and bruised some part of the Bed-teaster and Furniture; but
    himself, Wife and Child were signally preserved: An Out-house of Mr.
    _F.M._ (containing a Stable, Millhouse, and a sort of Barn, judged
    about 40 Foot in length) standing at the end of our Town, and much
    expos'd to the Wind, intirely fell, which was the most considerable
    Damage: Not one of our Town was kill'd, or notably hurt; tho' scarce
    any but were terribly alarm'd by the dreadful Violence of it, which
    remitted about five in the Morning: The beautiful Cathedral Church
    of _Glocester_ suffer'd much; but of that I suppose you will have an
    account from some proper Hand: This I was willing to signifie to
    you, in answer to your Letter, not that I think them worthy of a
    publick Memorial; but the Preservation of _W.M._ his Wife and Child
    was remarkable,

      _Your unknown Friend
           and Servant_,
      _Teuxbury Jan._ 12. 1703/4.  John Matthews.


      _Bishop's Hatfield_, Decem. 9. 1703.

    _SIR_,

    I perceive by an Advertisement in the _Gazette_ of last _Monday_,
    that a Relation of some considerable Things which happened in the
    late Tempest is intended to be printed, which design I believe will
    be well approved of, that the Memory of it may be perpetuated. I
    will give you an Account of some of the observable Damages done in
    this Parish: The Church which was Til'd is so shattered, that the
    Body of it is entirely to be ripp'd. Two Barns, and a Stable have
    been blown down; in the latter were 13 Horses, and none of them
    hurt, tho' there was but one to be seen when the Men first came. I
    have number'd about 20 large Trees blown down, which stood in the
    regular Walks in the Park here. It is said, that all the Trees blown
    down in both the Parks will make above an hundred Stacks of Wood. A
    Summer-house which stood on the East-side of the Bowling-green at
    _Hatfield_-House, was blown against the Wall, and broken, and a
    large part of it carried over the Wall, beyond a Cartway into the
    plowed Grounds. A great part of the South-wall belonging to one of
    the Gardens was levelled with the Ground; tho' it was so strong,
    that great part of it continues cemented, tho' it fell upon a
    Gravel-walk. Several Things which happened, incline me to think that
    there was something of an _Hurricane_. Part of the fine painted
    Glass-window in my Lord _Salisbury_'s Chapel was broken, tho' it
    looked towards the East. The North-side of an House was untiled
    several Yards square. In some places the Lead has been raised up,
    and over one Portal quite blown off. In _Brocket-hall_ Park
    belonging to Sir _John Reade_, so many Trees are blown down, that
    lying as they do, they can scarce be numbred, but by a moderate
    Computation, they are said to amount to above a Thousand. The
    Damages which this Parish hath sustained, undoubtedly amount to many
    hundred Pounds, some of the most considerable I have mentioned to
    you, of which I have been in great Measure an Eye-witness, and have
    had the rest from Credible Persons, especially the matter of
    _Brocket-hall_ Park, it being two Miles out of Town, tho' in this
    Parish. I am,

      _Sir, Your humble Servant_,
         George Hemsworth, _M.A._
      _Curate of_ Bishop's Hatfield, _in Hartfordshire_.

_The shorter Accounts which have been sent up from almost all parts of_
England, _especially to the South of the_ Trent; _tho' we do not
transmit them at large as the abovesaid Letters are, shall be faithfully
abridg'd for the readier comprising them within the due compass of our
Volume._

_From_ Kent _we have many strange Accounts of the Violence of the Storm,
besides what relate to the Sea Affairs._

_At_ Whitstable, _a small Village on the Mouth of the East Swale of the
River_ Medway, _we are inform'd a Boat belonging to a Hoy was taken up
by the Violence of the Wind, clear off from the Water, and being bourn
up in the Air, blew turning continually over and over in its progressive
Motion, till it lodg'd against a rising Ground, above 50 Rod from the
Water; in the passage it struck a Man, who was in the way, and broke his
Knee to pieces._

_We content our selves with relating only the Fact, and giving
Assurances of the Truth of what we Relate, we leave the needful Remarks
on such Things to another place._

_At a Town near_ Chartham, _the Lead of the Church rolled up together,
and blown off from the Church above 20 Rod distance, and being taken up
afterwards, and weigh'd it, appear'd to weigh above 2600 weight._

_At_ Brenchly _in the Western Parts of_ Kent, _the Spire of the Steeple
which was of an extraordinary hight was overturn'd; the particulars
whereof you have in the following Letter, from the Minister of the
place._

    _SIR_,

    According to your request, and my promise, for the service of the
    publick, I have here given you an Account of the Effects of the late
    Tempestuous Winds in the Parish of _Brenchly_, in the County of
    _Kent_, as freely and impartially as can be consistent with the
    Damages sustained thereby, _viz._

    A stately Steeple, whose Altitude exceeded almost, if not all, in
    _Kent_, the height whereof, according to various Computations, it
    never in my knowledge being exactly measured, did amount at least to
    10 Rods; some say 12, and others more; yet this strong and noble
    Structure by the Rage of the Winds was levelled with the Ground, and
    made the sport and pastime of Boys and Girls, who to future Ages,
    tho' perhaps incredibly, yet can boast they leaped over such a
    Steeple, the fall thereof beat down great part of the Church and
    Porch, the damage of which to repair, as before, will not amount to
    less than 800 or 1000 _l._ This is the publick loss; neither does
    private and particular much less bemoan their Condition, for some
    Houses, and some Barns, with other Buildings, are quite demolished;
    tho' Blessed be God, not many Lives or Limbs lost in the fall, and
    not one House, but what suffered greatly by the Tempest. Neither
    were Neighbouring Parishes much more favoured; but especially, a
    place called _Great Peckham_, whose Steeple also, almost as high as
    ours, was then blown down, but not so much Damage to the Church,
    which God preserve safe and sound for ever.

      _This is the nearest account that can be given, by your unknown
                                                        Servant_,
                                                   Tho. Figg.

_As the above Letter mentions the fall of the Spire of_ Great Peckham,
_we have omitted a particular Letter from the place._

_In or near_ Hawkhurst _in_ Sussex, _a Waggon standing in a Field loaden
with Straw, and bound well down in order to be fetch't away the next
day, the Wind took the Waggon, drove it backward several Rods, force't
it through a very thick Hedge into the Road, and the way being dirty,
drove it with that force into the Mud or Clay of the Road, that six
Horses could not pull it out._

_The Collector of these Accounts cannot but enter the Remarks he made,
having occasion to Traverse the County of_ Kent _about a Month after the
Storm; and besides, the general Desolation which in every Village gave
almost the same prospect; he declares, that he reckoned 1107 dwelling
Houses, Out-houses and Barns blown quite down, whole Orchards of Fruit
Trees laid flat upon the Ground, and of all other sorts of Trees such a
quantity, that tho' he attempted to take an Account of them, he found
'twas impossible, and was oblig'd to give it over._

_From_ Monmouth _we have a Letter, that among a vast variety of Ruins,
in their own Houses and Barns; one whereof fell with a quantity of Sheep
in it, of which seven were kill'd: The Lead of the great Church, tho' on
the side from the Wind, was roll'd up like a roll of Cloth, and blown
off from the Church._

_I chose to note this, because the Letter says, it was upon the
North-side of the Church, and which seems to confirm what I have
observ'd before, of the Eddies of the Wind, the Operation whereof has
been very strange in several places, and more Violent than the Storm it
self._

_At_ Wallingford, _one_ Robert Dowell, _and his Wife, being both in Bed,
the Chimney of the House fell in, demolish'd the House, and the main
Beam breaking fell upon the Bed, the Woman receiv'd but little Damage,
but the Man had his Thigh broke by the Beam, and lay in a dangerous
Condition when the Letter was wrote, which was the 18th of_ January
_after_.

_From_ Axminster _in_ Somersetshire _take the following plain, but
honest Account._

    _SIR_,

    The best account I can give of the Storm in these Parts is as
    follows: Dr. _Towgood_ had his Court Gate, with a piece of Wall
    blown to the other side of the Road, and stands upright against the
    Hedge, which was 12 Foot over, and it was as big as two Horses could
    draw: A sheet of Lead which lay flat was carried from Sir _William
    Drake_'s quite over a Wall into the Minister's Court, near
    three-score Yards: There was a Tree which stood in Mr. _John
    Whitty_'s Ground which broke in the middle, and the top of it blew
    over the Hedge, and over a Wall, and over a top of a House, and did
    not hurt the House: There was a Mow of Corn that was blown off the
    Posts, and sate upright without hurt, belonging to _William Oliver_,
    at an Estate of _Edward Seymour_'s, called _Chappel Craft_: A Maiden
    Oke which stood in the _Quille_ more than a Man could fathom, was
    broke in the middle: Several hundred of Apple-Trees, and other Trees
    blown down: Most Houses damnify'd in the Tiles and Thatch, but no
    Houses blown down, and no Person hurt nor killed; neither did the
    Church nor Tower, nor the Trees in the Church-yard received much
    Damage: Our loss in the Apple-Trees is the greatest; because we
    shall want Liquor to make our Hearts merry; the Farmer's sate them
    up again, but the Wind has blown them down since the Storm.

_From_ Hartley _in the County of_ Southampton_, an honest Countryman
brought the following Account by way of Certificate, from the Minister
of the Parish._

    _SIR_,

    I the Minister of the abovesaid Parish, in the County of
    _Southampton_, do hereby Certifie of the several Damages done by the
    late great Wind in our own, and the Parish adjacent; several
    dwelling Houses strip'd, and several Barns overturn'd, several Sign
    Posts blown down, and many Trees, both Timber and Fruit; and
    particularly my own Dwelling House very much mortify'd, a Chimney
    fell down, and endanger'd both my own, and Families Lives. I am,

      _Sir, your humble Servant_,
                          Nathan Kinsey.

_From_ Okingham _in_ Berkshire, _and from_ Bagshot _in_ Surrey, _as
follows_.

    _SIR_,

    Great damage to the Houses, some Barns down, the Market-house very
    much shattred, the Clock therein spoiled, several hundreds of Trees
    torn up by the Roots, most of them Elms, nothing more remarkable
    than what was usual in other places. It is computed, that the damage
    amounts to 1000 _l._ And most of the Signs in the Town blown down,
    and some of the Leads on the Church torn up: Yet by the goodness of
    God, not one Person killed nor hurt.

      _Bagshot_ in _Surry_.

    The Chimneys of the Mannor House, some of them blown down, and 400
    Pannel of Pales, with some of the Garden Walls blown down, and in
    and about the Town several great Elms torn up by the Roots, most of
    the Houses shatter'd, and the tops of Chimneys blown down.

    _In the Parish_, a great many Chimneys, the tops of them blown down,
    and the Houses and Barns very much shatter'd, _&c._ the damage in
    all is supposed about 300 _l._ none killed.

    This is all the Account I can give you concerning the damage done by
    the Tempest hereabouts. This is all at present from,

      _Your Humble Servant_,
      _Bagshot_,
      _Feb._ 1. 1704.     Jo. Lewis.

_At_ Becles _the Leads of the Church ript up, part of the Great Window
blown down, and the whole Town exceedingly shatter'd._

_At_ Ewell _by_ Epsome _in_ Surry, _the Lead from the flat Roof of Mr._
Williams'_s House was roll'd up by the Wind, and blown from the top of
the House clear over a Brick Wall near 10 Foot high, without damnifying
either the House or the Wall, the Lead was carried near 6 Rod from the
House; and_ as our Relator says, _was Computed to weigh near 10 Tun.
This is Certified by Mr._ George Holdsworth _of_ Epsome, _and sent for
the Service of the present Collection, to the Post House at_ London, _to
whom we refer for the Truth of the Story._

_From_ Ely _in the County of_ Cambridge, _we have the following
Relation; also by a Letter from another Hand, and I the rather Transmit
this Letter, because by other hands we had an account, that it was
expected the Cathedral or Minster at_ Ely, _being a very Ancient
Building, and Crazy, would not have stood the fury of the Wind, and some
People that lived within the reach of it, had Terrible Apprehensions of
its falling, some shocks of the Wind gave it such a Motion, that any one
that felt it, would have thought it was impossible it should have
stood._

    _SIR_,

    According to your request, I have made it my business to get the
    exactest and truest account (I am able) of the damages and losses
    sustain'd on this side the Country, by the late Violent Storm. The
    Cathedral Church of _Ely_ by the Providence of God did, contrary to
    all Men's expectations, stand out the shock; but suffered very much
    in every part of it, especially that which is called the Body of it,
    the Lead being torn and rent up a considerable way together; about
    40 lights of Glass blown down, and shatter'd to pieces, one
    Ornamental Pinacle belonging to the North Isle demolish'd, and the
    Lead in divers other parts of it blown up into great heaps. Five
    Chimneys falling down in a place called the Colledge, the place
    where the Prebendaries Lodgings are, did no other damage (prais'd be
    God) then beat down some part of the Houses along with them; the
    loss which the Church and College of _Ely_ sustain'd, being by
    computation near 2000 _l._ The Sufferers are the Reverend the Dean
    and Chapter of the said Cathedral. The Wind Mills belonging both to
    the Town and Country, felt a worse fate, being blown or burnt down
    by the Violence of the Wind, or else disabled to that degree, that
    they were wholy unable of answering the design they were made for;
    three of the aforesaid Mills belonging to one _Jeremiah Fouldsham_
    of _Ely_, a very Industrious Man of mean Substance, were burnt and
    blown down, to the almost Ruin and Impoverishment of the aforesaid
    Person, his particular loss being upward of a 100 _l._ these are the
    most remarkable disasters that befel this side of the Country. The
    Inhabitants both of the Town of _Ely_ and Country general, receiv'd
    some small damages more or less in their Estates and Substance,
    _viz._ The Houses being stript of the Tiling, Barns and Out-houses
    laid even with the Ground, and several Stacks of Corn and Cocks of
    Hay being likewise much damaged, the general loss being about 20000
    _l._ the escape of all Persons here from Death, being generally
    miraculous; none as we can hear of being kill'd, tho' some were in
    more imminent danger than others. This, Sir, is as true, and as
    faithful an account as we are able to collect.

            _I am Yours_,
      Ely, Jan. 21. 1703.   A. Armiger.

_From_ Sudbury _in_ Suffolk_, an honest plain Countryman gives us a
Letter, in which telling us of a great many Barns blown down, Trees,
Chimneys and Tiles, he tells us in the Close, that their Town fared
better than they expected, but that for all the neighbouring Towns they
are fearfully shatter'd._

_From_ Tunbridge, _a Letter to the Post Master, giving the following
Account._

    _SIR_,

    I cannot give you any great account of the particular damage the
    late great Winds has done, but at _Penchurst Park_ there was above
    500 Trees blown down, and the Grove at _Southborough_ is almost
    blown down; and there is scarce a House in Town, but hath received
    some damage, and particularly the School-House. A Stack of Chimnies
    blown down, but no body, God be thanked, have lost their Lives, a
    great many Houses have suffered very much, and several Barns have
    been blown down: At _East Peckam_, hard by us, the Spire of the
    Steeple was blown down: And at Sir _Thomas Twisden_'s in the same
    Parish, there was a Stable blown down, and 2 Horses killed: And at
    _Brenchly_ the Spire of the Steeple was blown down; and at _Summer
    Hill Park_ there were several Trees blown down; which is all at
    present from,

      _Your Servant to Command_,
                          Elizabeth Luck.

_At_ Laneloe _in the County of_ Brecon _in_ Wales, _a Poor Woman with a
Child, was blown away by the Wind, and the Child being about 10 years
old, was taken up in the Air two or three yards, and very much Wounded
and Bruised in the fall._

_At_ Ledbury _in_ Herefordshire, _we have an Account of two Wind Mills
blown down, and four Stacks of Chimneys in a new built House at a
Village near_ Ledbury, _which Wounded a Maid Servant; and at another
Gentleman's House near_ Ledbury, _the Coachman fearing the Stable would
fall, got his Master's Coach Horses out to save them, but leading them
by a great Stack of Hay, the Wind blew down the Stack upon the Horses,
killed one, and Maimed the other._

_From_ Medhurst _in_ Sussex, _the following Letter is a short account of
the loss of the Lord_ Montacute, _in his Seat there, which is
extraordinary great, tho' Abridg'd in the Letter_.

    _SIR_,

    I received a Letter from you, wherein you desire me to give you an
    account of what damage was done in and about our Town, I praise God
    we came off indifferent well; the greatest damage we received, was
    the untiling of Houses, and 3 Chimneys blown down, but 4 or 5 Stacks
    of Chimneys are blown down at my Lord _Montacute_'s House, within a
    quarter of a mile of us, one of them fell on part of the Great Hall,
    which did considerable damage; and the Church Steeple of _Osborn_,
    half a mile from us, was blown down at the same time; and my Lord
    had above 500 Trees torn up by the Roots, and near us several Barns
    blown down, one of Sir _John Mill_'s, a very large Tiled Barn.

      Medhurst,      _Your humble Servant_
      _Jan._ 18. 1703/4.      John Prinke.

_From_ Rigate _the particulars cannot be better related, than in the
following Letter_

    _SIR_,

    In answer to the Letter you sent me, relating to the late great
    Wind, the Calamity was universal about us, great numbers of vast
    tall Trees were blown down, and some broken quite asunder in the
    middle, tho' of a very considerable bigness. Two Wind-mills were
    blown down, and in one there happened a remarkable Providence, and
    the Story thereof may perhaps be worth your observation, which is,
    _viz._ That the Miller of _Charlewood_ Mill, not far from _Rigate_
    hearing in the night time the Wind blew very hard, arose from his
    Bed, and went to his Mill, resolving to turn it toward the Wind, and
    set it to work, as the only means to preserve it standing; but on
    the way feeling for the Key of the Mill, he found he had left it at
    his Dwelling House, and therefore returned thither to fetch it, and
    coming back again to the Mill, found it blown quite down, and by his
    lucky forgetfulness saved his Life, which otherwise he most
    inevitably had lost. Several Stacks of Corn and Hay were blown down
    and shattered a very great distance from the places where they
    stood. Many Barns were also blown down, and many Stacks of Chimnies;
    and in the Town and Parish of _Rigate_, scarce a House but suffered
    considerable damage, either in the Tyling or otherwise. In the
    Parish of _Capel_ by _Darking_ lived one _Charles Man_, who was in
    Bed with his Wife and two Children, and by a fall of part of his
    House, he and one Child were killed, and his Wife, and the other
    Child, miraculously preserved, I am

    Rigate,     _Sir, Your humble Servant_,
    Jan. 13. 1703/4.            Tho. Foster.

_From the City of_ Hereford, _this short Letter is very explicit._

    _SIR_,

    The best account I can give of the Storm, is as follows; a Man and
    his Son was killed with the fall of his House, in the Parish of
    _Wormsle_, 2 miles off _Webly_ in _Herefordshire_. My Lord
    _Skudamoor_ had several great Oaks blown down in the Parish of
    _Hom_, 4 miles from _Hereford_; there were several great Elms blown
    down at a place called _Hinton_, on _Wye_ side, half a mile off
    _Hereford_, and some hundreds of Fruit Trees in other Parts of this
    County, and two Stacks of Chimnies in this City, and abundance of
    Tiles off the old Houses,

      _Hereford_,         _Yours_, &c.
      _Jan._ 2. 1703.            Anne Watts.

_At_ Hawkhurst, _on the Edge of_ Sussex _and_ Kent, _11 Barnes were
blown down, besides the Houses Shatter'd or Uncover'd._

_From_ Basingstoke _in_ Hampshire, _the following Letter is our
Authority for the Particulars_.

    _SIR_,

    I cannot pretend to give you a particular account concerning the
    great Wind, but here are a great many Houses blown down, many Barns,
    and abundance of Trees. A little Park, three Miles from _Basing
    Stoke_, belonging to Esq. _Waleps_ has a great quantity of Timber
    blown down, there is 800 _l_'s worth of Oak sold, and 800 _l_'s
    worth of other Trees to be sold, and so proportionably all over the
    Country. Abundance of Houses until'd, and a great many Chimneys
    blown down; but I do not hear of any body kill'd about us. Most of
    the People were in great Fears and Consternation; insomuch, that
    they thought the World had been at an end. Sir,

      _Yours to Command_
                          W. Nevill

At _Shoram_ the Market House, an Antient and very strong building, was
blown flat to the Ground, and all the Town shatter'd. _Brighthelmston_
being an old built and poor, tho' populous Town, was most miserably
torn to pieces, and made the very Picture of Desolation, that it lookt
as if an Enemy had Sackt it.

_The following Letter from a small Town near_ Helford _in_ Cornwall _is
very Authentick, and may be depended on_.

    _SIR_,

    According to your Request, in a late Advertisement, in which you
    desir'd an Impartial Account of what Accidents hapned by the late
    Dreadful Storm, in order to make a true and just Collection of the
    same, please to take the following Relation, _viz._ Between 8 and
    9-a-Clock the Storm began, with the Wind at N.W. about 10-a-Clock
    it veer'd about from W. to S.W. and back to West again, and between
    11 and 12-a-Clock it blew in a most violent and dreadful manner,
    that the Country hereabouts thought the great day of Judgment was
    coming.

    It continued thus blowing till 5-a-Clock and then began to abate a
    little, but has done a Prodigious damage to almost all sorts of
    People, for either their Houses are blown down, or their Corn blown
    out of their tack-yards (some Furlongs distance) from the same that
    the very fields look in a manner, as if they had shak'd the Sheaves
    of Corn over them. Several Barns blown down, and the Corn that was
    in the same carried clear away.

    The Churches here abouts have suffered very much, the Roofs of
    several are torn in pieces, and blown a considerable Distance off.

    The small Quantity of Fruit-Trees we had in the Neighbourhood about
    us are so dismember'd, and torn in pieces, that few or none are left
    fit for bearing Fruit.

    The large Timber Trees, as Elm, Oak, and the like, are generally
    blown down, especially the largest and highest Trees suffered most;
    for few Gentlemen that had Trees about their Houses have any left;
    and it is generally observ'd here, that the Trees and Houses that
    stood in Valleys, and most out of the Wind, have suffered most. In
    short, the Damage has been so general, that both Rich and Poor have
    suffered much.

    In _Helford_, a small Haven, not far from hence, there was a Tin
    Ship blown from her Anchors with only one Man, and two Boys on
    Board, without Anchor, Cable or Boat, and was forc'd out of the
    said Haven about 12-a-Clock at Night; the next Morning by 8-a-Clock,
    the Ship miraculously Run in between two Rocks in the _Isle of
    Wight_, where the Men and Goods were saved, but the Ship lost: Such
    a Run, in so short a time, is almost Incredible, it being near 80
    Leagues in 8 hours time, I believe it to be very true, for the
    Master of the said Ship I know very well, and some that were
    concern'd in her Lading, which was Tin, &c.

      _From St._ Keaverne _Parish in_ Cornwall,
      _May_ 26. 1704.          _Yours &c._ W.T.

    _Thus far our Letters_.

It has been impossible to give an exact relation in the matter of
publick Damage, either as to the particulars of what is remarkeable, or
an Estimate of the general loss.

The Abstract here given, as near as we could order it, is so well taken,
that we have, _generally speaking_, something remarkable from every
quarter of the Kingdom, to the South of the _Trent_.

It has been observ'd, that tho' it blew a great Storm farther Northward,
yet nothing so furious as this way. At _Hull_, indeed, as the Relation
Expresses, it was violent, but even that violence was moderate, compar'd
to the Stupendious fury with which all the Southern part of the Nation
was Attack'd.

When the Reader finds an Account here from _Milford-haven_ in _Wales_,
and from _Helford_ in _Cornwall_ West, from _Yarmouth_ and _Deal_ in the
East, from _Portsmouth_ in the South, and _Hull_ in the North, I am not
to imagine him so weak as to suppose all the vast Interval had not the
same, or proportion'd suffering, when you find one Letter from a Town,
and two from a County, it is not to be supposed that was the whole
damage in that County, but, on the contrary, that every Town in the
County suffered the same thing in proportion; and it would have been
endless to the Collector, and tiresom to the Reader, to have Enumerated
all the Individuals of every County; 'twould be endless to tell the the
Desolation in the Parks, Groves, and fine Walks of the Gentry, the
general havock in the Orchards and Gardens among the Fruit Trees,
especially in the Counties of _Devon_, _Somerset_, _Hereford_,
_Gloucester_ and _Worcester_, where the making great quantities of Cyder
and Perry, is the reason of numerous and large Orchards, among which,
for several Miles together, there would be very few Trees left.

In _Kent_ the Editor of this Book has seen several great Orchards, the
Trees lying flat on the Ground, and perhaps one Tree standing in a place
by it self, as a House might shelter it, perhaps none at all.

So many Trees were every where blown cross the Road, that till the
People were call'd to saw them off, and remove them, the ways were not
passable.

Stacks of Corn and Hay were in all places either blown down, or so torn,
that they receiv'd great damage, and in this Article 'tis very
observable, those which were only blown down receiv'd the least Injury;
when the main body of a Stack of Hay stood safe, the top being loosen'd
by the Violence of the Wind, the Hay was driven up into the Air, and
flew about like Feathers; that it was entirely lost and hung about in
the Neighbouring Trees, and spread on the Ground for a great distance
and so perfectly seperated, that there was no gathering it together.

Barly and Oats suffered the same casualty, only that the weight of the
Corn settled it sooner to the Ground than the Hay.

As to the Stacks of Wheat, the Accounts are very strange; from many
places we have Letters, and some so incredible, that we dare not venture
on the Readers faith to transmit them, least they should shock their
belief in those very strange Relations already set down, and better
Attested, as of a great Stack of Corn taken from the Hovel on which it
stood, and without Dislocating the Sheaves, set upon another Hovel, from
whence the Wind had just before remov'd another Stack of equal
Dimensions; of a Stack of Wheat taken up with the Wind, and set down
whole 16 Rod off, and the like. But as we have other Relations equally
strange, their Truth considered, we refer the Reader to them, and assure
the World we have several Accounts of Stacks of Wheat taken clear off
from the Frame or Steddal, and set down whole, abundance more over-set,
and thrown off from their standings, and others quite dispers'd, and in
a great measure destroy'd.

'Tis true, Corn was exceeding cheap all the Winter after, but they who
bring that as a reason to prove there was no great quantity destroy'd,
are oblig'd to bear with me in telling them they are mistaken, for the
true reason was as follows,

The Stacks of Corn in some Counties, the West chiefly, where the People
generally lay up their Corn in Stacks, being so damnify'd as above, and
the Barns in all parts being Universally uncovered, and a vast number of
them overturn'd, and blown down, the Country People were under a
necessity of Threshing out their Corn with all possible speed, least if
a Rain had follow'd, as at that time of Year was not unlikely, it might
ha' been all spoil'd.

And it was a special Providence to those People also, as well as to us
in _London_; that it did not Rain, at least to any quantity, for near
three Weeks after the Storm.

Besides this, the Country People were obliged to thresh out their Corn
for the sake of the Straw, which they wanted to repair the Thatch, and
covering of their Barns, in order to secure the rest.

All these Circumstances forc'd the Corn to Market in unusual quantities,
and that by Consequence made it Cheaper than ordinary, and not the
exceeding quantity then in Store.

The Seats of the Gentlemen in all places had an extraordinary share in
the Damage; their Parks were in many places perfectly dismantled, the
Trees before their Doors levelled, their Garden Walls blown down, and I
could give a List, I believe, of a thousand Seats in _England_, within
the compass of our Collected Papers, who had from 5 to 20 Stacks of
Chimnies blown down, some more, some less, according to the several
Dimentions of the Houses.

I am not obliging the Reader to comply with the Calculations here
following, and it would have took up too much room in this small Tract
to name particulars; but according to the best estimate I have been able
to make from the general Accounts sent up by Persons forward to have
this matter recorded, the following particulars are rather under than
over the real Truth.

25 Parks in the several Counties, who have above 1000 Trees in each
Park, blown down.

_New Forest_ in _Hampshire_ above 4000, and some of prodigious Bigness;
above 450 Parks and Groves, who have from 200 large Trees to 1000 blown
down in them.

Above 100 Churches covered with Lead, the Lead roll'd up, the Churches
uncover'd; and on some of them, the Lead in prodigious Quantities blown
to incredible Distances from the Church.

Above 400 Wind-mils overset, and broken to pieces; or the Sails so blown
round, that the Timbers and Wheels have heat and set the rest on Fire,
and so burnt them down, as particularly several were in the Isle of
_Ely_.

Seven Steeples quite blown down, besides abundance of Pinacles and
Battlements from those which stood; and the Churches where it happened
most of them Demolish'd, or terribly Shattered.

Above 800 dwelling Houses blown down, in most of which the Inhabitants
received some Bruise or Wounds, and many lost their Lives.

We have reckoned, including the City of _London_, about 123 People
kill'd; besides such as we have had no account of; the Number of People
drowned are not easily Guest; but by all the Calculations I have made
and seen made, we are within compass, if we reckon 8000 Men lost,
including what were lost on the Coast of _Holland_, what in Ships blown
away, and never heard of, and what were drowned in the Flood of the
_Severn_, and in the River of _Thames_.

What the Loss, how many poor Families ruin'd, is not to be Estimated,
the Fire of _London_ was an exceeding Loss, and was by some reckon'd at
four Millions sterling; which, tho' it was a great Loss, and happened
upon the spot, where vast Quantities of Goods being expos'd to the fury
of the Flames, were destroy'd in a hurry, and 14000 dwelling Houses
entirely consum'd.

Yet on the other Hand, that Desolation was confin'd to a small Space,
the loss fell on the wealthiest part of the People; but this loss is
Universal, and its extent general, not a House, not a Family that had
any thing to lose, but have lost something by this Storm, the Sea, the
Land, the Houses, the Churches, the Corn, the Trees, the Rivers, all
have felt the fury of the Winds.

I cannot therefore think I speak too large, if I say, I am of the
Opinion, that the Damage done by this Tempest far exceeded the Fire of
_London_.

They tell us the Damages done by the Tide, on the Banks of the _Severn_,
amounts to above 200000 pounds, 15000 Sheep drown'd in one Level,
Multitudes of Cattle on all the sides, and the covering the Lands with
Salt Water is a Damage cannot well be Estimated: The High Tide at
_Bristol_ spoil'd or damnify'd 1500 Hogsheds of Sugars and Tobaccoes,
besides great quantities of other Goods.

'Tis impossible to describe the general Calamity, and the most we can do
is, to lead our Reader to supply by his Immagination what we omit; and
to believe, that as the Head of the particulars is thus collected, an
infinite Variety at the same time happened in every place, which cannot
be expected to be found in this Relation.

There are some additional Remarks to be made as to this Tempests, which
I cannot think improper to come in here: As,

1. That in some Parts of _England_ it was join'd with terrible
Lightnings and Flashings of Fire, and in other places none at all; as to
Thunder the Noise the Wind made, was so Terrible, and so Unusual, that I
will not say, People might not mistake it for Thunder; but I have not
met with any, who will be positive that they heard it Thunder.

2. Others, as in many Letters we have received to that purpose insist
upon it, that they felt an Earthquake; and this I am doubtful of for
several Reasons.

1st. We find few People either in City or Country ventur'd out of their
Houses, or at least till they were forced out, and I cannot find any
Voucher to this opinion of an Earthquake, from those whose Feet stood
upon the _Terra Firma_, felt it move, and will affirm it to be so.

2d. As to all those People who were in Houses, I cannot allow them to be
competent Judges, for as no House was so strong as not to move and
shake with the force of the Wind, so it must be impossible for them to
distinguish whither that motion came from above or below: As to those in
Ships, they will not pretend to be competent Judges in this case, and I
think the People within doors as improper to decide, for what might not
that motion they felt in their Houses, from the Wind do, that an
Earthquake could do. We found it rockt the strongest Buildings, and in
several places made the Bells in the Steeples strike, loosen'd the
Foundations of the Houses, and in some below them quite down, but still
if it had been an Earthquake, it must have been felt in every house, and
every place; and whereas in those Streets of _London_, where the Houses
stand thick and well Built, they could not be so shaken with the Wind as
in opener places; yet there the other would have equally been felt, and
better distinguisht; and this particularly by the Watch, who stood on
the Ground, under shelter of publick Buildings, as in St. _Paul_'s
Church, the Exchange Gates, the Gates of the City, and such like;
wherefore, as I am not for handing to Posterity any matter of Fact upon
ill Evidence, so I cannot transmit what has its Foundation only in the
Amazements of the People.

'Tis true, that there was an Earthquake felt in the _North East parts of
the Kingdoms_, about a Month afterwards, of which several Letters here
inserted make mention, and one very particularly from _Hull_; but that
there was any such thing as an Earthquake during the Storm, I cannot
agree.

Another remarkable thing I have observ'd, and have several Letters to
show of the Water which fell in the Storm, being brackish, and at
_Cranbrook_ in _Kent_, which is at least 16 Miles from the Sea, and
above 25 from any Part of the Sea to windward, from whence the Wind
could bring any moisture, _for it could not be suppos'd to fly against
the Wind_; the Grass was so salt, the Cattel would not eat for several
Days, from whence the ignorant People suggested another Miracle, _viz._
that it rain'd salt Water.

The answer to this, I leave to two Letters printed in the _Philosophical
Transactions_; as follows,

_Part of a Letter from Mr._ Denham _to the Royal Society_,

    _SIR_,

    I have just now, since my writing, receiv'd an account from a
    Clergy-man, an Intelligent Person at _Lewes_ in _Sussex_, not only
    that the Storm made great desolations thereabouts, but also an odd
    Phænomenon occasioned by it, _viz._ 'That a Physician travelling
    soon after the Storm to _Tisehyrst_, about 20 Miles from _Lewes_,
    and as far from the Sea, as he rode he pluckt some tops of Hedges,
    and chawing them found them Salt. Some Ladies of _Lewes_ hearing
    this, tasted some Grapes that were still on the Vines, and they also
    had the same relish. The Grass on the Downs in his Parish was so
    salt, that the Sheep in the Morning would not feed till hunger
    compelled them, and afterwards drank like Fishes, as the Shepherds
    report. This he attributeth to Saline Particles driven from the
    Sea.--He heareth also, that People about _Portsmouth_ were much
    annoyed with sulphurous Fumes, complaining they were most suffocated
    therewith'.

V. _Part of a Letter from Mr._ Anthony van Lauwenhoek, _F.R.S. giving
his Observations on the late Storm_.

    Delft, Jan. 8. 1704. N.S.

    _SIR_,

    I affirmed in my Letter of the 3d of _November_ last past, that
    Water may be so dash'd and beaten against the Banks and Dikes by a
    strong Wind, and divided into such small Particles, as to be carried
    far up into the Land.

    Upon the 8th of _December_, 1703. N.S. We had a dreadful Storm from
    the South West, insomuch, that the Water mingled with small parts of
    Chalk and Stone, was so dasht against the Glass-windows, that many
    of them were darkned therewith, and the lower Windows of my House,
    which are made of very fine Glass, and always kept well scower'd,
    and were not open'd till 8-a-Clock that Morning, notwithstanding
    that they look to the North East, and consequently stood from the
    Wind; and moreover, were guarded from the Rain by a kind of Shelf or
    Pent-house over them; were yet so cover'd with the Particles of the
    Water which the Whirl-wind cast against them, that in less than
    half an hour they were deprived of most of their transparency, and,
    forasmuch as these Particles of Water were not quite exhaled, I
    concluded that it must be Sea-water, which the said Storm had not
    only dasht against our Windows, but spread also over the whole
    Country.

    That I might be satisfied herein, I blow'd two small Glasses, such
    as I thought most proper to make my Observations with, concerning
    the Particles of Water that adhered to my Windows.

    Pressing these Glasses gently against my Windows, that were covered
    with the suppos'd Particles of Sea-water, my Glasses were tinged
    with a few of the said Particles.

    These Glasses, with the Water I had thus collected on them, I placed
    at about half a Foot distance from the Candle, I view'd them by my
    Microscope, reck'ning, that by the warmth of the Candle, and my Face
    together, the Particles of the said Water would be put into such a
    motion, that they would exhale for the most part, and the Salts that
    were in 'em would be expos'd naked to the sight, and so it happened;
    for in a little time a great many Salt Particles did, as it were,
    come out of the Water, having the Figure of our common Salt, but
    very small, because the Water was little, from whence those small
    Particles proceeded; and where the Water had lain very thin upon the
    Glass, there were indeed a great number of Salt Particles, but so
    exceeding fine, that they almost escaped the Sight through a very
    good Microscope.

    From whence I concluded, that these Glass windows could not be
    brought to their former Lustre, but by washing them with a great
    deal of Water; for if the Air were very clear, and the Weather dry,
    the watry Particles would soon exhale, but the Salts would cleave
    fast to the Glass, which said Salts would be again dissolv'd in
    moist Weather, and sit like a Dew or Mist upon the Windows.

    And accordingly my People found it when they came to wash the
    afore-mentioned lower Windows of my House: but as to the upper
    Windows, where the Rain had beat against them, there was little or
    no Salt to be found sticking upon that Glass.

    Now, if we consider, what a quantity of Sea-water is spread all over
    the Country by such a terrible Storm, and consequently, how greatly
    impregnated the Air is with the same; we ought not to wonder, that
    such a quantity of Water, being moved with so great a force, should
    do so much mischief to Chimneys, tops of Houses, _&c._ not to
    mention the Damages at Sea.

    During the said Storm, and about 8-a-Clock in the Morning, I cast my
    Eye upon my Barometer, and observ'd, that I had never seen the
    Quick-silver so low; but half an hour after the Quick-silver began
    to rise, tho' the Storm was not at all abated, at least to any
    appearance; from whence I concluded, and said it to those that were
    about me, that the Storm would not last long; and so it happened.

    There are some that affirm, that the scattering of this Salt-water
    by the Storm will do a great deal of harm to the Fruits of the
    Earth; but for my part I am of a quite different Opinion, for I
    believe that a little Salt spread over the surface of the Earth,
    especially where it is heavy Clay-ground, does render it exceeding
    Fruitful; and so it would be, if the Sand out of the Sea were made
    use of to the same purpose.

These Letters are too well, and too judiciously Written to need any
comment of mine; 'tis plain, the watry Particles taken up from the Sprye
of the Sea into the Air, might by the impetuosity of the Winds be
carried a great way, and if it had been much farther, it would have been
no Miracle in my account; and this is the reason, why I have not related
these Things, among the extraordinary Articles of the Storm.

That the Air was full of Meteors, and fiery Vapours, and that the
extraordinary Motion occasion'd the firing more of them than usual, a
small stock of Philosophy will make very rational; and of these we have
various Accounts, more in some places than in others, and I am apt to
believe these were the Lightnings we have been told of; for I am of
Opinion, that there was really no Lightning, such as we call so in the
common Acceptation of it; for the Clouds that flew with so much Violence
through the Air, were not, as to my Observation, such as usually are
fraighted with Thunder and Lightning, the Hurries nature was then in, do
not consist with the System of Thunder, which is Air pent in between the
Clouds; and as for the Clouds that were seen here flying in the Air,
they were by the fury of the Winds so seperated, and in such small
Bodies, that there was no room for a Collection suitable, and necessary
to the Case we speak of.

These Cautions I thought necessary to set down here, for the
satisfaction of the Curious; and as they are only my Opinions, I submit
them to the judgment of the Reader.




_Of the Damages on the Water_


As this might consist of several Parts, I was inclin'd to have divided
it into Sections or Chapters, relating particularly to the publick Loss,
and the private; to the Merchant, or the Navy, to Floods by the Tides,
to the River Damage, and that of the Sea; but for brevity, I shall
confine it to the following particulars.

    First, _The Damage to Trade_.
    Secondly, _The Damage to the Royal Navy_.
    Thirdly, _The Damage by High Tides_.


First, _of the Damage to Trade_.

I might call it a Damage to Trade, that this Season was both for some
time before and after the Tempest, so exceeding, and so continually
Stormy, that the Seas were in a manner Unnavigable and Negoce, at a kind
of a general Stop, and when the Storm was over, and the Weather began to
be tolerable; almost all the Shipping in _England_ was more or less out
of Repair, for there was very little Shipping in the Nation, but what
had receiv'd some Damage or other.

It is impossible, but a Nation so full of Shipping as this, must be
exceeding Sufferers in such a general Disaster, and who ever considers
the Violence of this Storm by its other dreadful Effects will rather
wonder, and be thankful that we receiv'd no farther Damage, than we
shall be able to give an Account of by Sea.

I have already observ'd what Fleets were in the several Ports of this
Nation, and from whence they came: As to Ships lost of whom we have no
other Account than that they were never heard of. I am not able to give
any Perticulars, other than that about three and forty Sail of all Sorts
are reckon'd to have perished in that manner. I mean of such Ships as
were at Sea, when the Storm began, and had no Shelter or Port to make
for their Safety: Of these, some were of the _Russia_ Fleet, of whom we
had an Account of 20 Sail lost the Week before the great Storm, but most
of them reach'd the Ports of _Newcastle_, _Humber_ and _Yarmouth_, and
some of the Men suffered in the general Distress afterwards.

But to proceed to the most general Disasters, by the same Method, as in
the former Articles of Damages by Land. Several Persons having given
themselves the Trouble to further this Design with Authentick
Particulars from the respective Ports. I conceive we cannot give the
World a clearer and more Satisfactory Relation than from their own
Words.

_The first Account, and plac'd so, because 'tis very Authentick and
Particular, and the furthest Port_ Westward, _and therefore proper to
begin our Relation, is from on Board her Majesty's Ship the_ Dolphin
_in_ Milford Haven, _and sent to us by Capt_. Soanes, _the Commodore of
a Squadron of Men of War then in that Harbour, to whom the Public is
very much oblig'd for the Relation, and which we thought our selves
bound there to acknowledge. The Account is as follows_,

    _SIR_,

    Reading the Advertisement in the _Gazette_, of your intending to
    Print the many sad Accidents in the late dreadful Storm, induced me
    to let you know what this place felt, tho a very good Harbour. Her
    Majesty's Ships the _Cumberland_, _Coventry_, _Loo_, _Hastings_ and
    _Hector_, being under my Command, with the _Rye_ a Cruizer on this
    Station, and under our Convoy about 130 Merchant Ships bound about
    Land; the 26th of _November_ at one in the Afternoon the Wind came
    at S. by E. a hard Gale, between which and N.W. by W. it came to a
    dreadful Storm, at three the next Morning was the Violentest of the
    Weather, when the _Cumberland_ broak her Sheet Anchor, the Ship
    driving near _this_, and the _Rye_, both narrowly escap'd carrying
    away; she drove very near the Rocks, having but one Anchor left,
    but in a little time they slung a Gun, with the broken Anchor fast
    to it, which they let go, and wonderfully preserv'd the Ship from
    the Shoar. Guns firing from one Ship or other all the Night for
    help, tho' 'twas impossible to assist each other, the Sea was so
    high, and the Darkness of the Night such, that we could not see
    where any one was, but by the Flashes of the Guns; when day light
    appear'd, it was a dismal sight to behold the Ships driving up and
    down one foul of another, without Masts, some sunk, and others upon
    the Rocks, the Wind blowing so hard, with Thunder, Lightning and
    Rain, that on the Deck a Man could not stand without holding. Some
    drove from _Dale_, where they were shelter'd under the Land, and
    split in pieces, the Men all drowned; two others drove out of a
    Creek, one on the Shoar so high up was saved, the other on the Rocks
    in another Creek, and Bulg'd; an _Irish_ Ship that lay with a Rock
    thro' her, was lifted by the Sea clear away to the other side of the
    Creek on a safe place; one Ship forc'd 10 Miles up the River before
    she could be stop'd, and several strangely blown into holes, and on
    Banks; a Ketch of _Pembroke_ was drove on the Rocks, the two Men and
    a Boy in her had no Boat to save their Lives; but in this great
    distress a Boat which broke from another Ship drove by them, without
    any in her, the two Men leap into her, and were sav'd, but the Boy
    drown'd; a Prize at _Pembroke_ was lifted on the Bridge, whereon is
    a Mill, which the Water blew up, but the Vessel got off again;
    another Vessel carried almost into the Gateway which leads to the
    Bridge, and is a Road, the Tide flowing several Foot above its
    common Course. The Storm continu'd till the 27th about 3 in the
    Afternoon; that by Computation nigh 30 Merchant Ships and Vessels
    without Masts are lost, and what Men are lost is not known; 3 Ships
    are missing, that we suppose Men and all lost. None of her Majesty's
    Ships came to any harm; but the _Cumberland_ breaking her Anchor in
    a Storm which happen'd the 18th at Night, lost another, which
    renders her uncapable of proceeding with us till supply'd. I saw
    several Trees and Houses which are blown down.

      _Your Humble Servant_,
                    Jos. Soanes.

_The next Account we have from the Reverend Mr._ Tho. Chest, _Minister
of_ Chepstow, _whose Ingenious account being given in his own Words,
gives the best Acknowledgement for his forwarding and approving this
design._

    _SIR_,

    Upon the Evening of _Friday, Nov._ 26. 1703, the Wind was very high;
    but about midnight it broke out with a more than wonted Violence,
    and so continued till near break of day. It ended a N.W. Wind, tho'
    about 3 in the Morning it was at S.W. The loudest cracks I observed
    of it, were somewhat before 4 of the Clock; we had here the common
    Calamity of Houses shatter'd and Trees thrown down.

    But the Wind throwing the Tyde very strongly into the _Severn_, and
    so into the _Wye_, on which _Chepstow_ is situated. And the Fresh in
    _Wye_ meeting with a Rampant Tyde, overflowed the lower part of our
    Town. It came into several Houses about 4 foot high, rather more;
    the greatest damage sustained in Houses, was by the makers of Salt,
    perhaps their loss might amount to near 200 _l._

    But the Bridge was a strange sight; it stands partly in
    _Monmouthshire_, and partly in _Gloucestershire_, and is built
    mostly of Wood, with a Stone Peer in the midst, the Center of which
    divides the two Counties; there are also Stone Platforms in the
    bottom of the River to bear the Wood-work. I doubt not but those
    Stone Platforms were covered then by the great Fresh that came down
    the River. But over these there are Wooden Standards fram'd into
    Peers 42 Foot high; besides Groundsils, Cap-heads, Sleepers, Planks,
    and (on each side of the Bridge) Rails which may make about 6 foot
    more, the Tyde came over them all: The length of the Wooden part of
    the Bridge in _Monmouthshire_ is 60 yards exactly, and thereabout in
    _Gloucestershire_; the _Gloucestershire_ side suffered but little,
    but in _Monmouthshire_ side the Planks were most of them carried
    away, the Sleepers (about a Tun by measure each) were many of them
    carried away, and several removed, and 'tis not doubted but the
    great Wooden Peers would have gone too; but it was so, that the
    outward Sleepers on each side the Bridge were Pinn'd or Bolted to
    the Cap-heads, and so kept them in their places.

    All the level Land on the South part of _Monmouthshire_, called the
    _Moors_, was overflow'd; it is a tract of Land about 20 miles long,
    all Level, save 2 little points of High-land, or 3; the Breadth of
    it is not all of one size, the broadest part is about 2 miles and ½.
    This Tyde came 5 Tydes before the top of the Spring, according to
    the usual run, which surprized the People very much. Many of their
    Cattle got to shore, and some dy'd after they were landed. It is
    thought by a _Moderate Computation_, they might lose in Hay and
    Cattle between 3 and 4000 _l._ I cannot hear of any Person drowned,
    save only one Servant Man, that ventur'd in quest of his Master's
    Cattle. The People were carried off, some by Boats, some otherways,
    the days following; the last that came off (that I can hear of) were
    on _Tuesday_ Evening, to be sure they were uneasy and astonished in
    that Interval. There are various reports about the height of this
    Tyde in the _Moors_, comparing it with that in _Jan._ 1606. But the
    account that seems likeliest to me, is, that the former Tyde ran
    somewhat higher than this. 'Tis thought most of their Land will be
    worth but little these 2 or 3 years, and 'tis known, that the
    repairing the Sea Walls will be very chargeable.

    _Gloucestershire_ too, that borders upon _Severne_ hath suffered
    deeply on the Forrest of _Deane_ side, but nothing in comparison of
    the other shore, from about _Harlingham_ down to the mouth of
    _Bristol_ River _Avon_, particularly from _Aust Cliffe_ to the
    Rivers Mouth (about 8 miles) all that Flat, called the _Marsh_ was
    drowned. They lost many Sheep and Cattle. About 70 Seamen were
    drown'd out of the _Canterbury_ Storeship, and other Ships that were
    Stranded or Wreck'd. The _Arundel_ Man of War, _Suffolk_ and
    _Canterbury_ Storeships, a _French_ Prize, and a _Dane_, were driven
    ashore and damnified; but the _Arundel_ and the _Danish_ Ship are
    got off, the rest remain on Ground. The _Richard and John_ of about
    500 Tun, newly come into _King-road_ from _Virginia_, was Staved.
    The _Shoram_ rode it out in _King-road_; but I suppose you may have
    a perfecter account of these things from _Bristol_. But one thing
    yet is to be remembred, one _Nelms_ of that Country, as I hear his
    Name, was carried away with his Wife and 4 Children, and House and
    all, and were all lost, save only one Girl, who caught hold of a
    Bough, and was preserved.

    There was another unfortunate Accident yet in these parts, one Mr.
    _Churchman_, that keeps the Inns at _Betesley_, a passage over the
    _Severn_, and had a share in the passing Boats, seeing a single Man
    tossed in a Wood-buss off in the River, prevailed with some
    belonging to the Customs, to carry himself and one of his Sons, and
    2 Servants aboard the Boat, which they did, and the Officers desired
    Mr. _Churchman_ to take out the Man, and come ashore with them in
    their Pinnace. But he, willing to save the Boat as well as the Man,
    tarried aboard, and sometime after hoisting Sail, the Boat overset,
    and they were all drowned, _viz._ the Man in the Boat, Mr.
    _Churchman_, his Son and 2 Servants, and much lamented, especially
    Mr. _Churchman_, and his Son, who were Persons very useful in their
    Neighbourhood. This happened on _Saturday_ about 11 of the Clock.

      _Your Humble Servant_,
                  Tho. Chest

_Mr._ Tho. Little _Minister of_ ---- Church _in_ Lyn, _in the County of_
Norfolk, _being requested to give in the particulars of what happen'd
thereabouts, gave the following, short but very pertinent Account_.

    _SIR_,

    I had answer'd yours sooner, but that I was willing to get the best
    Information I could of the effect of the late dismal Storm amongst
    us. I have advis'd with our Merchants, and Ship Masters, and find
    that we have lost from this Port 7 Ships, the damage whereof, at a
    modest Computation, amounts to 3000 _l._ the Men that perish'd in
    them are reckon'd about 20 in number. There is another Ship missing,
    tho we are not without hopes that she is gone Northward, the value
    of Ship and Cargo about 1500 _l._

    The Damage sustain'd in the Buildings of the Town is computed at
    1000 _l._ at least.

      _I am your faithful Friend and Servant._
      Lyn, _Jan._ 17. 1703.       Tho. Little.

_We have had various Accounts from_ Bristol, _but as they all contain
something of the Same in general, only differently Exprest, the
following, as the most positively asserted, and best Exprest, is
recorded for the publick Information._

    _SIR_,

    Observing your desire (lately signify'd in the _Gazette_) to be
    further inform'd concerning the Effects of the late dreadful
    Tempest, in order to make a Collection thereof. I have presum'd to
    present you with the following particulars concerning _Bristol_, and
    the parts near Adjacent, being an Eye-witness of the same, or the
    Majority of it. On _Saturday_ the 27th of _Novemb._ last, between
    the hours of one and two in the Morning, arose a most prodigious
    Storm of Wind, which continued with very little intermission for the
    space of 6 hours, in which time it very much shattered the
    Buildings, both publick and private, by uncovering the Houses,
    throwing down the Chimneys, breaking the Glass Windows, overthrowing
    the Pinnacles and Battlements of the Churches, and blowing off the
    Leads: The Churches in particular felt the fury of the Storm. St.
    _Stephen_'s Tower had three Pinnacles blown off, which beat down the
    greatest part of the Church. The Cathedral is likewise very much
    defac'd, two of its Windows, and several Battlements being blown
    away; and, indeed, most Churches in the City felt its force more or
    less; it also blew down abundance of great Trees in the Marsh,
    _College-Green_, St. _James_'s Church-yard, and other places in the
    City. And in the Country it blew down and scattered abundance of Hay
    and Corn Mows, besides almost Levelling many Orchards and Groves of
    stout Trees. But the greatest damage done to the City was, the
    violent over-flowing of the Tide, occasion'd by the force of the
    Wind, which flowed an extraordinary height, and did abundance of
    damage to the Merchants Cellers. It broke in with great fury over
    the Marsh Country, forcing down the Banks or Sea Walls, drowning
    abundance of Sheep, and other Cattle, washing some houses clear
    away, and breaking down part of others, in which many Persons lost
    their Lives. It likewise drove most of the Ships in _Kingroad_ a
    considerable way upon the Land, some being much shatter'd, and one
    large Vessel broke all in pieces, and near all the Men lost,
    besides several lost out of other Vessels. To conclude, the Damage
    sustein'd by this City alone in Merchandise, Houses, &c. is Computed
    to an Hundred Thousand Pounds, besides the great Loss in the
    Country, of Cattel, Corn, &c. which has utterly ruined many Farmers,
    whose substance consisted in their Stock aforesaid. So having given
    you the most material Circumstances, and fatal Effects of this great
    Tempest in these Parts. I conclude

      _Your (unknown) Friend and Servant_,
                                 Danial James

_From_ Huntspill _in_ Somersetshire, _we have the following Account
from, as we suppose, the Minister of the place, tho' unknown to the
Collector of this Work._

    _SIR_,

    The Parish of _Huntspill_ hath receiv'd great Damage by the late
    Inundation of the Salt Water, particularly the West part thereof
    suffered most: For on the 27th Day of _November_ last, about four of
    the Clock in the Morning, a mighty Southwest Wind blew so strong, as
    (in a little time) strangely tore our Sea Walls; insomuch, that a
    considerable part of the said Walls were laid smooth, after which
    the Sea coming in with great Violence, drove in five Vessels
    belonging to _Bridgewater Key_ out of the Channel, upon a Wharf in
    our Parish, which lay some distance off from the Channel, and there
    they were all grounded; it is said, that the Seamen there fathom'd
    the depth and found it about nine Foot, which is taken notice to be
    four Foot above our Walls when standing; the Salt Water soon
    overflow'd all the West end of the Parish, forcing many of the
    Inhabitants from their Dwellings, and to shift for their Lives: The
    Water threw down several Houses, and in one an antient Woman was
    drown'd, being about fourscore Years old: Some Families shelter'd
    themselves in the Church, and there staid till the Waters were
    abated: Three Window Leaves of the Tower were blown down, and the
    Ruff-cast scal'd off in many places: Much of the Lead of the Church
    was damnify'd; the Windows of the Church and Chancel much broken,
    and the Chancel a great part of it untiled: The Parsonage House,
    Barn and Walls received great Damage; as also, did some of the
    Neighbours in their Houses: At the West end of the Parsonage House
    stood a very large Elm, which was four Yards a quarter and half a
    quarter in the Circumference, it was broken off near the Ground by
    the Wind, without forcing any one of the Moars above the Surface,
    but remain'd as they were before: The Inhabitants (many of them)
    have receiv'd great Losses in their Sheep, and their other Cattle;
    in their Corn and Hay there is great spoil made. This is what
    Information I can give of the Damage this Parish hath sustain'd by
    the late dreadful Tempest.

      _I am, Sir,_

      _Huntspill_,        _Your humble Servant_,
      _January_ 6, 1703/4.                  Sam. Wooddeson

_From_ Minehead _in_ Somersetshire, _and_ Swanzy _in_ Wales, _the
following Accounts are to be depended upon._

    _SIR_,

    I received yours, and in answer to it these are to acquaint you,
    that all the Ships in our Harbour except two (which were 23 or 24 in
    Number, besides Fishing Boats) were, through the Violence of the
    Storm, and the mooring Posts giving way, drove from their Anchors,
    one of them was stav'd to pieces, nine drove Ashoar; but 'tis hoped
    will be all got off again, though some of them are very much
    damnified: Several of the Fishing Boats likewise, with their Nets,
    and other Necessaries were destroy'd. Three Seamen were drowned in
    the Storm, and one Man was squeez'd to Death last _Wednesday_, by
    one of the Ships that was forc'd Ashoar, suddenly coming upon him,
    as they were digging round her, endeavouring to get her off.

    Our Peer also was somewhat damaged, and 'tis thought, if the Storm
    had continued till another Tide, it would have been quite washed
    away, even level to the Ground; which if so, would infallibly have
    ruined our Harbour: Our Church likewise was almost all untiled, the
    neighbouring Churches also received much Damage: The Houses of our
    Town, and all the Country round about, were most of them damaged;
    some (as I am credibly informed) blown down, and several in a great
    Measure uncovered: Trees also of a very great Bigness were broken
    off in the middle, and vast Numbers blown down; one Gentleman, as he
    told me himself, having 2500 Trees blown down: I wish you good
    Success in these your Undertakings, and I pray God that this late
    great Calamity which was sent upon us as a punishment for our Sins,
    may be a warning to the whole Nation in general, and engage every
    one of us to a hearty and sincere Repentance; otherwise, I'm afraid
    we must expect greater Evils than this was to fall upon us.

      _From your unknown Friend and Servant_,
                                   Frist. Chave.


     _Swanzy, January_ 24, 1703/4.

    _SIR_,

    I receiv'd yours and accordingly have made an enquiry in our
    Neighbourhood what damage might be done in the late Storm, thro
    Mercy we escap'd indifferently, but you will find underwritten as
    much as I can learn to be certainly true.

    The Storm began here about 12 at Night, but the most violent part of
    it was about 4 the next Morning, about which time the greatest part
    of the Houses in the Town were uncovered more or less, and one House
    clearly blown down; the damage sustain'd to the Houses is modestly
    computed at 200 _l._ the South Isle of the Church was wholly
    uncovered, and considerable damage done to the other Isles, and 4
    large Stones weighing about One Hundred and Fifty or Two Hundred
    Pound each, was blown down from the end of the Church, three of the
    four Iron Spears, that stood with Vanes on the corners of the Tower,
    were broke short off in the middle, and the Vanes not to be found,
    and the Tail of the Weather Cock, which stood in the middle of the
    Tower was blown off, and found in a Court near 400 yards distant
    from the Tower. In _Cline_ Wood belonging to the Duke of _Beaufort_
    near this Town, there is about 100 large Trees blown down; as also
    in a Wood on our River belonging to Mr. _Thomas Mansell_ of
    _Brittonferry_ about 80 large Oakes. The Tydes did not much damage,
    but two Ships were blown off our Bar, and by Providence one came
    aground on the Salt House point near our Harbour, else the Ship and
    Men had perished; the other came on shore, but was saved. I hear
    further, that there are several Stacks of Corn over-turn'd by the
    violence of the Wind, in the Parishes of _Roysily_ and _Largenny_ in
    _Gower_; most of the Thatcht Houses in this Neighbourhood was
    uncovered. Sir, this you may rely on to be true,

      _Yours, &c._
        William Jones

_From_ Grimsby _in_ Lincolnshire, _the following Account is taken for
favourable_.

    _SIR_,

    The late dreadful Tempest did not (Blessed be God) much affect us on
    shore, so far was it from having any events more than common, that
    the usual marks of ordinary Storms are not to be met with in these
    parts upon the Land. I wish I could give as good an Account of the
    Ships then at Anchor in our Road, the whole Fleet consisted of about
    an hundred Sail, fifty whereof were wanting after the Storm. The
    Wrecks of four are to be seen in the Road at low Water their Men all
    lost, three more were sunk near the _Spurn_, all the Men but one
    saved, six or seven were driven ashoar, and got off again with
    little or no damage. A small Hoy, not having a Man on Board, was
    taken at Sea, by a Merchant Ship, what became of the rest, we are
    yet to learn. This is all the Account I am able to give of the
    effects of the late Storm, which was so favourable to us. I am

      _Sir, Your most Humble Servant_,
                       Tho. Fairweather

_From_ Newport _and_ Hastings _the following Accounts are chiefly
mentioned to confirm what we have from other Inland parts, and
particularly in the Letter Printed in the Philosophical Transactions,
concerning the Salt being found on the Grass and Trees, at great
distance from the Sea, of which there are very Authentick Relations._

    _SIR_,

    I received yours, and do hereby give you the best account of what
    hapned by the late Storm in our Island; we have had several Trees
    blown down, and many Houses in our Town, and all parts of the Island
    partly uncovered, but Blessed be God not one Person perisht that I
    know or have heard of; nor one Ship or Vessel stranded on our shores
    in that dreadful Storm, but only one Vessel laden with Tin, which
    was driven from her Anchors in _Cornwal_, but was not stranded here
    till the _Tuesday_ after, having spent her Main-mast and all her
    Sails. On _Sunday_ night last we had several Ships and Vessels
    stranded on the South and South West parts of our Island; but
    reports are so various, that I cannot tell you how many, some say 7,
    others 8, 12, and some say 15; one or two laden with Cork, and two
    or three with _Portugal_ Wine, Oranges and Lemons, one with Hides
    and Butter, one with Sugar, one with Pork, Beef and Oatmeal, and one
    with Slates. _Monday_ night, _Tuesday_ and _Wednesday_ came on the
    back of our Island, and some in at the _Needles_, the Fleet that
    went out with the King of _Spain_, but it has been here such a
    dreadful Storm, and such dark weather till this Afternoon, that we
    can give no true account of them; some say that have been at the
    Wrecks this Afternoon, that there were several great Ships coming in
    then: There is one thing I had almost forgotten, and I think is very
    remarkable, that there was found on the Hedges and Twigs of Trees,
    knobs of Salt Congeal'd, which must come from the South and South
    West parts of our Sea Coast, and was seen and tasted at the distance
    of 6 and 10 miles from those Seas, and this account I had my self
    from the mouths of several Gentlemen of undeniable Reputation,

      _Yours_,
      Tho. Reade.


    _Hastings_ in Sussex, _Jan._ 25. 1703.

    _SIR_,

    You desire to know what effect the late dreadful Storm of Wind had
    upon this Town; in answer to your desire, take the following
    Account. This Town consists of at least 600 Houses, besides two
    great Churches, some Publick Buildings, and many Shops standing upon
    the Beach near the Sea, and yet by the special Blessing and
    Providence of God, the whole Town suffered not above 30 or 40 _l._
    damage in their Houses, Churches, Publick Building and Shops, and
    neither Man, Woman or Child suffered the least hurt by the said
    Terrible Storm. The Town stands upon the Sea shore, but God be
    thanked the Sea did us no damage; and the Tydes were not so great as
    we have seen upon far less Storms. The Wind was exceeding
    Boisterous, which might drive the Froth and Sea moisture six or
    seven miles up the Country, for at that distances from the Sea, the
    Leaves of the Trees and Bushes, were as Salt as if they had been
    dipped in the Sea, which can be imputed to nothing else, but the
    Violent Winds carrying the Froth and Moisture so far. I believe it
    may be esteemed almost Miraculous that our Town escaped so well in
    the late terrible Storm, and therefore I have given you this
    Account. I am

      _Sir, your Friend_,
           Stephen Gawen.

_The following melancholy Account from the Town of_ Brighthemstone _in_
Sussex _is sent us._

    _SIR_,

    The late dreadful Tempest in _Novemb._ 27. 1703. last, had very
    terrible Effects in this Town. It began here much about One of the
    Clock in the Morning, the violence of the Wind stript a great many
    Houses, turn'd up the Leads off the Church, over-threw two
    Windmills, and laid them flat on the ground, the Town in general
    (upon the approach of Day-light) looking as if it had been
    Bombarded. Several Vessels belonging to this Town were lost, others
    stranded, and driven ashoar, others forced over to _Holland_ and
    _Hamborough_, to the great Impoverishment of the Place. _Derick
    Pain_, Junior, Master of the _Elizabeth_ Ketch of this Town lost,
    with all his Company. _George Taylor_, Master of the Ketch call'd
    the _Happy Entrance_, lost, and his Company, excepting _Walter
    Street_, who swiming three days on a Mast between the _Downs_ and
    _North Yarmouth_, was at last taken up. _Richard Webb_, Master of
    the Ketch call'd the _Richard and Rose_ of _Brighthelmston_, lost,
    and all his Company near St. _Hellens_. _Edward Friend_, Master of
    the Ketch call'd _Thomas and Francis_, stranded near _Portsmouth_.
    _Edward Glover_, Master of the Pink call'd _Richard and Benjamin_,
    stranded near _Chichester_, lost one of his Men, and he, and the
    rest of his Company, forced to hang in the Shrouds several hours.
    _George Beach_, Junior, Master of the Pink call'd _Mary_, driven
    over to _Hamborough_ from the _Downes_, having lost his Anchor,
    Cables and Sails. _Robert Kichener_, Master of the _Cholmley_ Pink
    of _Brighton_, lost near the _Roseant_ with nine Men, five Men and a
    Boy saved by another Vessel. This is all out of this Town, besides
    the loss of several other able Seamen belonging to this Place,
    aboard of her Majesty's Ships, Transports and Tenders.

_From_ Lymington _and_ Lyme _we have the following Letters_:

    _SIR_,

    I receiv'd your Letter, and have made Enquiry concerning what
    Disasters happen'd during the late Storm; what I can learn at
    present, and that may be credited, are these. That a _Guernsey_
    Privateer lost his Fore-top-mast, and cut his main Mast by the
    Board, had 12 Men wash'd over board, and by the toss of another
    immediate Sea three of them was put on board again, and did very
    well; this was coming within the _Needles_. That six Stacks of
    Chimnies were, by the violence of the Wind, blown from a great House
    call'd _New Park_ in the _Forrest_, some that stood directly to
    Windward, were blown clear off the House without injuring the Roof,
    or damaging the House, or any mischief to the Inhabitants, and fell
    some Yards from the House. Almost 4000 Trees were torn up by the
    roots within her Majesty's Forrest call'd _New Forrest_, some of
    them of very great bulk, others small, _&c._ A Ship of about 200
    Tun, from _Maryland_, laden with Tobacco, call'd the _Assistance_,
    was Cast away upon _Hurst Beach_, one of the Mates, and 4 Sailors,
    were lost. By the flowing of the Sea over _Hurst Beach_, two
    Salt-terns were almost ruin'd belonging to one Mr. _Perkins_. A new
    Barn, nigh this Town, was blown quite down. The Town receiv'd not
    much damage, only some Houses being stript of the Healing, Windows
    broke, and a Chimney or two blown down. Considerable damages amongst
    the Farmers in the adjacent Places, by over-turning Barns,
    Out-houses, Stacks of Corn and Hay, and also amongst poor Families,
    and small Houses, and likewise abundance of Trees of all sorts,
    especially Elms and Apple-Trees, has been destroy'd upon the several
    Gentlemen's, and others Estates hereabouts. These are the most
    remarkable Accidents that I can Collect at present; if any thing
    occur, it shall be sent you by

      _Your humble Servant,
      Lymington, _Feb._ 1704.   James Baker._

_A True and exact Account of the Damages done by the late great Wind in
the Town of_ Lyme Regis, _and parts adjacent in the County of_ Dorset,
_as followeth_,

    _SIR_

    _Impri_. Five Boats drove out of the Cob and one Vessel lost, broke
    loose all but one Cabel, and swung out of the Cob, but was got in
    again with little Damage; and had that Hurricane happened here at
    High Water, the Cob must without doubt have been destroyed, and all
    the Vessels in it been lost, most of the Houses had some Damage: But
    a great many Trees blown up by the Roots in our Neighbourhood, and
    four Miles to the Eastward of this Town: A _Guernsey_ Privateer of
    eight Guns, and 43 Men drove Ashoar, and but three Men saved of the
    43; the place where the said Privateer run Ashoar, is call'd _Sea
    Town_, half a Mile from _Chidock_, where most of there Houses were
    uncovered, and one Man killed as he lay in Bed: This is the true
    Account here, but all Villages suffered extreamly in Houses, Trees,
    both Elm and Apples without Number.

      _Sir, I am your humble Servant_,
                       Stephen Bowdidge.

_From_ Margate, _and the Island of_ Thanet _in_ Kent, _the following is
an honest Account_.

    _SIR_,

    The following Account is what I can give you, of what Damage is done
    in this Island in the late great Storm; in this Town hardly a House
    escaped without Damage, and for the most part of them the Tiles
    blown totally off from the Roof, and several Chimneys blown down,
    that broke through part of the Houses to the Ground; and several
    Families very narrowly escaped being kill'd in their Beds, being by
    Providence just got up, so that they escaped, and none was kill'd;
    the like Damages being done in most little Towns and Villages upon
    this Island, as likewise Barns, Stables and Out-housing blown down
    to the Ground in a great many Farm-houses and Villages within the
    Island, part of the Leads of our Church blown clear off, and a great
    deal of Damage to the Church it self; likewise a great deal of
    Damage to the Churches of St. _Lawrance Minster_, _Mounton_ and St.
    _Nichola_: In this Road was blown out one _Latchford_ of _Sandwich_
    bound home from _London_, with divers Men and Women passengers all
    totally lost: And another little Pink that is not heard of blown
    away at the same time, but where it belonged is not known; here rid
    out the Storm the Princess _Anne_, Captain _Charles Gye_, and the
    _Swan_, both Hospital Ships, had no Damage, only Captain _Gye_ was
    parted from one of his Anchors, and part of a Cable which was
    weigh'd and carry'd after him to the River, by one of our Hookers.
    All from

      _Yours to Command_,
                    P.H.

_From_ Malden _in_ Essex, _and from_ Southampton, _the following
Accounts_.

    _SIR_,

    By the late great Storm our Damages were considerable. A Spire of a
    Steeple blown down: Several Vessels in this Harbour were much
    shatter'd, particularly one Corn Vessel laden for _London_,
    stranded, and the Corn lost to the Value of about 500 _l._ and the
    Persons narrowly escaped by a small Boat that relieved them next
    Day: Many Houses ript up, and some blown down: The Churches
    shatter'd, and the principal Inn of this Town thirty or forty pound
    Damage in Tiling: At a Gentleman's House (one Mr. _Moses Bourton_)
    near us, a Stack of Chimneys blown down, fell through the Roof upon
    a Bed, where his Children was, who were drag'd out, and they
    narrowly escaped; many other Chimney's blown down here, and much
    Mischief done.


    _Southampton, February the_ 7_th_ 1703/4.

    _SIR_,

    Yours I have receiv'd, in which you desire me to give you an Account
    of what remarkable Damage the late violent Storm hath done at this
    place; in answer, We had most of the Ships in our River, and those
    that laid off from our Keys blown Ashoar, some partly torn to
    Wrecks, and three or four blown so far on Shoar with the Violence of
    the Wind, that the Owners have been at the Charges of unlading them,
    and dig large Channels for the Spring Tides to float them off, and
    with much a do have got them off, it being on a soft Sand or Mud,
    had but little Damage; we had, God be prais'd no body drowned, tho'
    some narrowly Escape't: As to our Town it being most part old
    Building, we have suffer'd much, few or no Houses have escape't:
    Several Stacks of Chimneys blown down, other Houses most part
    untiled: Several People bruis'd, but none kill'd: Abundance of Trees
    round about us, especially in the New Forest blown down; others with
    their Limbs of a great bigness torn; it being what we had most
    Material. I rest.

      _Sir, your humble Servant_,
                      Geo. Powell.

_We have abundance of strange Accounts from other Parts, and
particularly the following Letter from the_ Downs, _and tho' every
Circumstance in this Letter is not litterally True, as to the Number of
Ships, or Lives lost, and the stile Coarse, and Sailor like; yet I have
inserted this Letter, because it seems to describe the Horror and
Consternation the poor Sailors were in at that time. And because this is
Written from one, who was as near an Eye Witness as any could possible
be, and be safe,_

    _SIR_,

    These Lines I hope in God will find you in good Health, we are all
    left here in a dismal Condition, expecting every moment to be all
    drowned: For here is a great Storm, and is very likely to continue;
    we have here the Rear Admiral of the Blew in the Ship, call'd the
    _Mary_, a third Rate, the very next Ship to ours, sunk, with Admiral
    _Beaumont_, and above 500 Men drowned: The Ship call'd the
    _Northumberland_, a third Rate, about 500 Men all sunk and drowned:
    The Ship call'd the _Sterling Castle_, a third Rate, all sunk and
    drowned above 500 Souls: And the Ship call'd the _Restoration_, a
    third Rate, all sunk and drowned: These Ships were all close by us
    which I saw; these Ships fired their Guns all Night and Day long,
    poor Souls, for help, but the Storm being so fierce and raging,
    could have none to save them: The Ship call'd the _Shrewsberry_ that
    we are in, broke two Anchors, and did run mighty fierce backwards,
    within 60 or 80 Yards of the Sands, and as God Almighty would have
    it, we flung our sheet Anchor down, which is the biggest, and so
    stopt: Here we all pray'd to God to forgive us our Sins, and to save
    us, or else to receive us into his Heavenly Kingdom. If our sheet
    Anchor had given way, we had been all drown'd: But I humbly thank
    God, it was his gracious Mercy that saved us. There's one Captain
    _Fanel_'s Ship, three Hospital Ships, all split, some sunk, and most
    of the Men drown'd.

       *       *       *       *       *

    There are above 40 Merchant Ships cast away and sunk: To see Admiral
    _Beaumont_, that was next us, and all the rest of his Men, how they
    climed up the main Mast, hundreds at a time crying out for help,
    and thinking to save their Lives, and in the twinkling of an Eye
    were drown'd: I can give you no Account, but of these four Men of
    War aforesaid, which I saw with my own Eyes, and those Hospital
    Ships, at present, by reason the Storm hath drove us far distant
    from one another: Captain _Crow_, of our Ship, believes we have lost
    several more Ships of War, by reason we see so few; we lye here in
    great danger, and waiting for a North Easterly Wind to bring us to
    _Portsmouth_, and it is our Prayers to God for it; for we know not
    how soon this Storm may arise, and cut us all off, for it is a
    dismal Place to Anchor in. I have not had my Cloaths off, nor a wink
    of Sleep these four Nights, and have got my Death with cold almost.

      _Yours to Command_,
               Miles Norcliffe.

    I send this, having opportunity by our Botes, that went Ashoar to
    carry some poor Men off, that were almost dead, and were taken up
    Swimming.

_The following Letter is yet more Particular and Authentick, and being
better exprest, may further describe the Terror of the Night in this
place._

    _SIR_,

    I understand you are a Person concerned in making up a Collection of
    some remarkable accidents that happened by the Violence of the late
    dreadful Storm. I here present you with one of the like. I presume
    you never heard before, nor hope may never hear again of a Ship that
    was blown from her Anchors out of _Helford Haven_ to the _Isle of
    Wight_, in less than eight hours, _viz._ The Ship lay in _Helford
    Haven_ about two Leagues and a half Westward of _Falmouth_, being
    laden with Tin, which was taken on Board from _Guague_ Wharf, about
    five or six miles up _Helford_ River, the Commanders name was
    _Anthony Jenkins_, who lives at _Falmouth_. About eight Clock in the
    Evening before the Storm begun, the said Commander and Mate came on
    Board and ordered the Crew that he left on Board, which was but one
    Man and 2 Boys; that if the Wind should chance to blow hard (which
    he had some apprehension of) to carry out the small Bower Anchor,
    and moor the Ship by 2 Anchors, and gave them some other orders, and
    his Mate and he went ashoar, and left the Crew aforesaid on Board;
    about nine a Clock the Wind began to blow, then they carried out the
    small Bower (as directed) it continued blowing harder and harder at
    West North West, at last the Ship began to drive, then they were
    forced to let go the best Bower Anchor which brought the Ship up.
    The Storm increasing more, they let go the Kedge Anchor, which was
    all they had to let go, so that the Ship rid with four Anchors a
    head: Between eleven and twelve a Clock the Wind came about West and
    by South in a most Terrible and Violent manner, that notwithstanding
    a very high Hill just to Windward of the Ship, and four Anchors
    ahead, she was drove from all her Anchors; and about twelve a Clock
    drove out of the Harbour without Anchor or Cable, nor so much as a
    Boat left in case they could put into any Harbour. In dreadful
    condition the Ship drove out clear of the Rocks to Sea, where the
    Man with the two Boys consulted what to do, at last resolved to keep
    her far enough to Sea, for fear of _Deadman's Head_, being a point
    of Land between _Falmouth_ and _Plimouth_, the latter of which
    places they designed to run her in, if possible, to save their
    Lives; the next morning in this frighted condition they steer'd her
    clear of the Land (to the best of their skill) sometimes almost
    under Water, and sometimes a top, with only the bonet of her
    Foresail out, and the Fore yard almost lower'd to the Deck; but
    instead of getting into _Plymouth_ next day as intended, they were
    far enough off that Port, for the next morning they saw Land, which
    proved to be _Peverel_ Point, a little to the Westward of the _Isle
    of Wight_; so that they were in a worse Consternation then before,
    for over-running their designed Port by seven a Clock, they found
    themselves off the _Isle of Wight_; where they consulted again what
    to do to save their Lives, one of the Boys was for running her into
    the _Downs_, but that was objected against, by reason they had no
    Anchors nor Boat, and the Storm blowing off shore in the _Downs_,
    they should be blown on the unfortunate _Goodwin Sands_ and lost.
    Now comes the last consultation for their lives, there was one of
    the Boys said he had been in a certain Creek in the _Isle of
    Wight_, where between the Rocks he believed there was room enough to
    run the Ship in and save their Lives, and desired to have the Helm
    from the Man, and he would venture to steer the Ship into the said
    place, which he according did, where there was only just room
    between Rock and Rock for the Ship to come in, where she gave one
    blow or two against the Rocks, and sunk immediately, but the Man and
    two Boys jumpt ashore, and all the Lading being Tin was saved, (and
    for their Conduct and Risk they run) they were all very well
    gratified, and the Merchants well satisfied.

      _Your Friend and Servant_,
      _May_ 28. 1704.        R.P.

And here I cannot omit that great Notice has been taken of the
Towns-people of _Deal_ who are blam'd, and I doubt not with too much
Reason for their great Barbarity in neglecting to save the Lives of
abundance of poor Wretches; who having hung upon the Masts and Rigging
of the Ships, or floated upon the broken Pieces of Wrecks, had gotten a
Shore upon the _Goodwin Sands_ when the Tide was out.

It was, without doubt, a sad Spectacle to behold the poor Seamen walking
too and fro upon the Sands, to view their Postures, and the Signals they
made for help, which, by the Assistance of Glasses was easily seen from
the Shore.

Here they had a few Hours Reprieve, but had neither present Refreshment,
nor any hopes of Life, for they were sure to be all wash'd into another
World at the Reflux of the Tide. Some Boats are said to come very near
them in quest of Booty, and in search of Plunder, and to carry off what
they could get, but no Body concern'd themselves for the Lives of these
miserable Creatures.

And yet I cannot but incert what I have receiv'd from very good Hands in
behalf of one Person in that Town, whose Humanity deserves this
remembrance, and I am glad of the Opportunity of doing some Justice in
this Case to a Man of so much Charity in a Town of so little.

Mr. _Thomas Powell_, of _Deal_, a Slop-Seller by Trade, and at that
time Mayor of the Town. The Character of his Person I need not dwell
upon here, other than the ensuing Accounts will describe, for when I
have said he is a Man of Charity and Courage, there is little I need to
add to it, to move the Reader to value both his Person, and his Memory;
and tho' I am otherwise a perfect Stranger to him, I am very well
pleased to transmit to Posterity the Account of his Behaviour, as an
Example to all good Christians to imitate on the like Occasions.

He found himself mov'd with Compasion at the Distresses of the poor
Creatures, whom he saw as aforesaid in that miserable Condition upon the
Sands, and the first Thing he did, he made Application to the
Custom-House Officers for the Assistance of their Boats and Men, to save
the Lives of as many as they could come at, the Custom House Men rudely
refus'd, either to send their Men, or to part with their Boats.

Provoked with the unnatural Carriage of the Custom House Officers, he
calls the People about him; and finding some of the Common People began
to be more than ordinarily affected with the Distresses of their
Countrymen, and as he thought a little enclin'd to venture; he made a
general Offer to all that would venture out, that he would pay them out
of his own Pocket _5s. per head_ for all the Men whose Lives they could
save, upon this Proposal several offered themselves to go, if he would
furnish 'em with Boats.

Finding the main Point clear, and that he had brought the Men to be
willing, he with their Assistance took away the Custom House Boats by
Force; and tho' he knew he could not justify it, and might be brought
into Trouble for it, and particularly if it were lost, might be oblig'd
to pay for it, yet he resolv'd to venture that, rather than hazard the
loss of his Design, for the saving so many poor Men's Lives, and having
Mann'd their Boat with a Crew of stout honest Fellows, he with them took
away several other Boats from other Persons, who made use of them only
to Plunder and Rob, not regarding the Distresses of the poor Men.

Being thus provided both with Men and Boats he sent them off, and by
this means brought on Shore above 200 Men, whose Lives a few Minutes
after, must infallibly ha' been lost.

Nor was this the End of his Care, for when the Tide came in, and 'twas
too late to go off again, for that all that were left were swallow'd up
with the Raging of the Sea, his Care was then to relieve the poor
Creatures, who he had sav'd, and who almost dead with Hunger and Cold,
were naked and starving.

And first he applied himself to the Queen's Agent _for Sick and Wounded
Seamen_, but he would not relieve them with One Penny, whereupon, at his
own Charge, he furnish'd them with Meat, Drink and Lodging.

The next Day several of them died, the Extremities they had suffer'd,
having too much Master'd their Spirits, these he was forc'd to bury also
at his own Charge, the Agent still refusing to Disburse one Penny.

After their Refreshment the poor Men assisted by the Mayor, made a fresh
Application to the Agent for Conduct Money to help them up to _London_,
but he answer'd he had no Order, and would Disburse nothing, whereupon
the Mayor gave them all Money in their Pockets, and Passes to
_Graves-End_.

I wish I could say with the same Freedom, that he receiv'd the Thanks of
the Government, and Reimbursement of his Money as he deserv'd, but in
this I have been inform'd, he met with great Obstructions and Delays,
tho' at last, after long Attendance, upon a right Application I am
inform'd he obtain'd the repayment of his Money, and some small
Allowance for his Time spent in solliciting for it.

Nor can the Damage suffered in the River of _Thames_ be forgot. It was a
strange sight to see all the Ships in the River blown away, the Pool was
so clear, that as I remember, not above 4 Ships were left between the
Upper part of _Wapping_, and _Ratcliff Cross_, for the Tide being up at
the Time when the Storm blew with the greatest violence. No Anchors or
Landfast, no Cables or Moorings would hold them, the Chains which lay
cross the River for the mooring of Ships, all gave way.

The Ships breaking loose thus, it must be a strange sight to see the
Hurry and Confusion of it, and as some Ships had no Body at all on
Board, and a great many had none but a Man or Boy left on Board just to
look after the Vessel, there was nothing to be done, but to let every
Vessel drive whither and how she would.

Those who know the Reaches of the River, and how they lye, know well
enough, that the Wind being at South West Westerly, the Vessels would
naturally drive into the Bite or Bay from _Ratcliff Cross_ to
_Lime-house Hole_, for that the River winding about again from thence
towards the New Dock at _Deptford_, runs almost due South West, so that
the Wind blew down one Reach, and up another, and the Ships must of
necessity drive into the bottom of the Angle between both.

This was the Case, and as the Place is not large, and the Number of
Ships very great, the force of the Wind had driven them so into one
another, and laid them so upon one another as it were in heaps, that I
think a Man may safely defy all the World to do the like.

The Author of this Collection had the curiosity the next day to view the
place and to observe the posture they lay in, which nevertheless 'tis
impossible to describe; there lay, by the best Account he could take,
few less than 700 sail of Ships, some very great ones between _Shadwel_
and _Limehouse_ inclusive, the posture is not to be imagined, but by
them that saw it, some Vessels lay heeling off with the Bow of another
Ship over her Waste, and the Stem of another upon her Fore-Castle, the
Boltsprits of some drove into the Cabbin Windows of others; some lay
with their Sterns tossed up so high, that the Tide flowed into their
Fore-Castles before they cou'd come to Rights; some lay so leaning upon
others, that the undermost Vessels wou'd sink before the other could
float; the numbers of Masts, Boltsprits and Yards split and broke, the
staving the Heads, and Sterns and Carved Work, the tearing and
destruction of Rigging, and the squeezing of Boats to pieces between the
Ships, is not to be reckoned; but there was hardly a Vessel to be seen
that had not suffer'd some damage or other in one or all of these
Articles.

There was several Vessels sunk in this hurry, but as they were generally
light Ships, the damage was chiefly to the Vessels; but there were two
Ships sunk with great quantity of Goods on Board, the _Russel_ Galley
was sunk at _Lime-house_, being a great part laden with Bale Goods for
the _Streights_, and the _Sarah_ Gally lading for _Leghorn_, sunk at an
Anchor at _Blackwall_; and though she was afterwards weighed and brought
on shore, yet her back was broke, or so otherwise disabled, as she was
never fit for the Sea; there were several Men drown'd in these last two
Vessels, but we could never come to have the particular number.

Near _Gravesend_ several Ships drove on shoar below _Tilbury_ Fort, and
among them five bound for the _West Indies_, but as the shoar is ouzy
and soft, the Vessels sat upright and easy, and here the high Tides
which follow'd, and which were the ruin of so many in other places, were
the deliverance of all these Ships whose lading and value was very
great, for the Tide rising to an unusual height, floated them all off,
and the damage was not so great as was expected.

If it be expected I should give an account of the loss, and the
particulars relating to small Craft, _as the Sailors call it_, in the
River it is to look for what is impossible, other than by generals.

The Watermen tell us of above 500 Wheries lost, most of which were not
sunk only but dasht to pieces one against another, or against the Shores
and Ships, where they lay: Ship Boats without number were driven about
in every corner, sunk and staved, and about 300 of them is supposed to
be lost. Above 60 Barges and Lighters were found driven foul of the
_Bridge_: some Printed accounts tell us of sixty more sunk or staved
between the _Bridge_ and _Hammersmith_.

Abundance of Lighters and Barges drove quite thro' the _Bridge_, and
took their fate below, whereof many were lost, so that we Reckon by a
modest account above 100 Lighters and Barges lost and spoil'd in the
whole, not reckoning such as with small damage were recovered.

In all this confusion it could not be, but that many Lives were lost,
but as the _Thames_ often times Buries those it drowns, there has been
no account taken. Two Watermen at _Black Fryars_ were drowned,
endeavouring to save their Boat; and a Boat was said to be Overset near
_Fulham_, and five People drown'd: According to the best account I have
seen, about 22 People were drown'd in the River upon this sad occasion,
which considering all circumstances is not a great many, and the damage
to Shipping computed with the vast number of Ships then in the River,
the Violence of the Storm, and the heighth of the Tide, confirms me in
the Truth of that Opinion, which I have heard many skilful Men own,
_viz._ that the River of _Thames_ is the best Harbour of _Europe_.

The heighth of the Tide, as I have already observ'd, did no great damage
in the River of _Thames_, and I find none of the Levels or Marshes,
which lye on both sides the River overflowed with it, it fill'd the
Cellars indeed at _Gravesend_, and on both sides in _London_, and the
Alehouse-keepers suffered some loss as to their Beer, but this damage is
not worth mentioning with what our Accounts give us from the _Severn_;
which, besides the particular Letters we have already quoted, the Reader
may observe in the following, what our general intelligence furnishes us
with.

The Damages in the City of _Gloucester_ they compute at 12000 _l._ above
15000 Sheep drown'd in the Levels on the side of the _Severne_, and the
Sea Walls will cost, as these Accounts tell us, 5000 _l._ to repair, all
the Country lyes under Water for 20 or 30 Miles together on both sides,
and the Tide rose three Foot higher than the tops of the Banks.

At _Bristol_ they tell us, The Tide fill'd their Cellars, spoil'd 1000
Hogsheads of Sugar, 1500 Hogsheds of Tobacco, and the Damage they reckon
at 100000 _l._ Above 80 People drown'd in the Marshes and River, Several
whole Families perishing together.

The Harbour at _Plimouth_, the Castle at _Pendennis_, the Cathederal at
_Gloucester_, the great Church at _Berkely_, the Church of St.
_Stephen's_ at _Bristol_; the Churches at _Blandford_, at _Bridgewater_,
at _Cambridge_, and generally the Churches all over _England_ have had a
great share of the Damage.

In _King Road_ at _Bristol_, the Damage by Sea is also very great; the
_Canterbury_ store Ship was driven on Shoar, and twenty-five of her Men
drown'd, as by our account of the Navy will more particularly appear,
the _Richard and John_, the _George_, and the _Grace_ sunk, and the
number of People lost is variously reported.

These Accounts in the four last Paragraphs being abstracted from the
publick Prints, and what other Persons collect, I desire the Reader will
observe, are not particularly vouch'd, but as they are all true in
substance, they are so far to be depended upon, and if there is any
mistake it relates to Numbers, and quantity only.

From _Yarmouth_ we expected terrible News, and every one was impatient
till they saw the Accounts from thence, for as there was a very great
Fleet there, both of laden Colliers, _Russia_ Men, and others, there was
nothing to be expected but a dreadful Destruction among them.

But it pleas'd God to order Things there, that the loss was not in
Proportion like what it was in other Places, not but that it was very
great too.

The _Reserve_ Man of War was come in but a day or two before, Convoy to
the great Fleet from _Russia_, and the Captain, Surgeon and Clerk, who
after so long a Voyage went on Shoar with two Boats to refresh
themselves, and buy Provisions, had the Mortification to stand on Shoar,
and see the Ship sink before their Faces; she foundred about 11-a-Clock,
and as the Sea went too high for any help to go off from the Shoar to
them, so their own Boats being both on Shoar, there was not one Man
sav'd; one _Russia_ Ship driving from her Anchors, and running foul of a
laden Collier sunk by his side, but some of her Men were sav'd by
getting on Board the Collier; three or four small Vessels were driven
out to Sea, and never heard of more; as for the Colliers, tho' most of
them were driven from their Anchors, yet going away to Sea, we have not
an account of many lost.

This next to the Providence of God, I give this reason for, first by all
Relations it appears that the Storm was not so violent farther
Northward, as it was there; and as it was not so Violent, so neither did
it continue so long: Now those Ships, who found they could not ride it
out in _Yarmouth_ Roads, but slipping their Cables went away to Sea,
possibly as they went away to the Northward, found the Weather more
moderate at least, not so violent, but it might be borne with, to this
may be added, that 'tis well known to such as use the Coast after they
had run the length of _Flambro_, they had the benefit of the Weather
Shoar, and pretty high land, which if they took shelter under might help
them very much; these, with other Circumstances, made the Damage much
less than every Body expected, and yet as it was, it was bad enough as
our Letter from _Hull_ gives an Account. At _Grimsby_ it was still worse
as to the Ships, where almost all the Vessels were blown out of the
Road, and a great many lost.

At _Plymouth_ they felt a full Proportion of the Storm in its utmost
fury, the _Edystone_ has been mention'd already, but it was a double
loss in that, the light House had not been long down, when the
_Winchelsea_, a homeward bound _Virginia_ Man was split upon the Rock,
where that Building stood, and most of her Men drowned.

Three other Merchant Ships were cast away in _Plimouth_ Road, and most
of their Men lost: The _Monk_ Man of War rode it out, but was oblig'd to
cut all her Masts by the Board, as several Men of War did in other
places.

At _Portsmouth_ was a great Fleet, as has been noted already, several of
the Ships were blown quite out to Sea, whereof some were never heard of
more; the _Newcastle_ was heard off upon the Coast of _Sussex_, where
she was lost with all their Men but 23; the _Resolution_, the _Eagle_
advice Boat, and the _Litchfield_ Prize felt the same fate, only sav'd
their Men: From _Cows_ several Ships were driven out to Sea, whereof one
run on Shoar in _Stokes-bay_, one full of Soldiers, and two Merchant Men
have never been heard off, as I could ever learn, abundance of the Ships
sav'd themselves by cutting down their Masts, and others Stranded, but
by the help of the ensuing Tides got off again.

_Portsmouth_, _Plymouth_, _Weymouth_, and most of our Sea Port Towns
look'd as if they had been Bombarded, and the Damage of them is not
easily computed.

Several Ships from the _Downs_ were driven over to the Coast of
_Holland_, and some sav'd themselves there; but several others were lost
there.

At _Falmouth_ 11 Sail of Ships were stranded on the Shoar, but most of
them got off again.

In _Barstable_ Harbour, a Merchant Ship outward bound was over-set, and
the express advice Boat very much shatter'd, and the Quay of the Town
almost destroy'd.

'Tis endless to attempt any farther Description of Losses, no place was
free either by Land or by Sea, every thing that was capable felt the
fury of the Storm; and 'tis hard to say, whether was greater the loss
by Sea, or by Land; the Multitude of brave stout Sailors is a melancholy
subject, and if there be any difference gives the sad Ballance to the
Account of the Damage by Sea.

We had an Account of about 11 or 12 Ships droven over for the Coast of
_Holland_, most of which were lost, but the Men saved, so that by the
best Calculation I can make, we have not lost less than 150 sail of
Vessels of all sorts by the Storm; the number of Men and other damages,
are Calculated elsewhere.

We have several Branches of this Story which at first were too easily
credited, and put in Print, but upon more strict examination, and by the
discoveries of Time, appear'd otherwise, and therefore are not set down.

It was in the design to have Collected the several Accounts of the fatal
effects of the Tempest abroad in Foreign Parts; but as our Accounts came
in from thence too imperfect to be depended upon; the Collector of these
Papers could not be satisfied to offer them to the World, being willing
to keep as much as possible to the Terms of his Preface.

We are told there is an Abstract to the same purpose with this in
_France_, Printed at _Paris_, and which contains a strange variety of
Accidents in that Country.

If a particular of this can be obtained, the Author Promises to put it
into _English_, and adding to them the other Accounts, which the rest of
the World can afford, together with some other Additions of the
_English_ Affairs, which could not be obtain'd in time here shall make
up the second part of this Work.

In the mean time the Reader may observe, _France_ felt the general
shock, the Peers, and Ricebank at _Dunkirk_, the Harbour at _Haver de
Grace_, the Towns of _Calais_ and _Bulloign_ give us strange Accounts.

All the Vessels in the Road before _Dunkirk_, being 23 or 27, I am not
certain, were dasht in pieces against the Peer Heads, not one excepted,
that side being a Lee shoar, the reason is plain, there was no going off
to Sea; and had it been so with us in the _Downs_ or _Yarmouth_ Roads,
it would have fared with us in the same manner, for had there been no
going off to Sea, 300 sail in _Yarmouth_ Roads had inevitably perisht.

At _Diepe_ the like mischief happened, and in proportion _Paris_ felt
the effects of it, as bad as _London_, and as a Gentleman who came from
thence since that time, affirmed it to me it was much worse.

All the N. East Countries felt it, in _Holland_ our accounts in general
are very dismal, but the Wind not being N.W. as at former Storms, the
Tyde did not drown them, nor beat so directly upon their Sea Wall.

It is not very irrational to Judge, that had the Storm beat more to the
North West, it must have driven the Sea upon them in such a manner, that
all their Dikes and Dams could not have sustained it, and what the
consequence of such an Inundation might ha' been they can best judge,
who remember the last terrible Irruption of the Sea there, which drowned
several thousand People, and Cattle without number.

But as our Foreign Accounts were not satisfactory enough to put into
this Collection, where we have promised to limit our selves by just
Vouchers, we purposely refer it all to a farther description as before.

Several of our Ships were driven over to those parts, and some lost
there, and the story of our great Ships which rid it out, at or near the
_Gunfleet_, should have come in here, if the Collector could have met
with any Person that was in any of the said Vessels, but as the accounts
he expected did not come in the time for the Impression, they were of
necessity left out.

The _Association_, a Second Rate, on Board whereof was Sir _Stafford
Fairborn_, was one of these, and was blown from the Mouth of the
_Thames_ to the Coast of _Norway_, a particular whereof as Printed in
the Annals of the Reign of Queen _Ann_'s is as follows.


_An Account of Sir_ Stafford Fairborne_'s Distress in the late Storm_.

    _SIR_,

    Her Majesty's Ship _Association_, a second Rate of 96 Guns,
    commanded by Sir _Stafford Fairborne_, Vice-Admiral of the Red, and
    under him Captain _Richard Canning_, sailed from the _Downs_ the
    24th of _November_ last, in Company with seven other Capital Ships,
    under the Command of the Honourable Sir _Cloudesley Shovel_, Admiral
    of the White, in their return from _Leghorn_ up the River. They
    anchored that Night off of the _Long-sand-head_. The next Day struck
    Yards and Top-Masts. The 27th about three in the Morning, the Wind
    at West South West, encreased to a Hurricane, which drove the
    _Association_ from her Anchors. The Night was exceeding dark, but
    what was more Dreadful, the _Galloper_, a very dangerous Sand, was
    under her Lee; so that she was in Danger of striking upon it, beyond
    the Power of Man to avoid it. Driving thus at the Mercy of the
    Waves, it pleased God, that about five a Clock she passed over the
    tail of the _Galloper_ in seven Fathom of Water. The Sea boisterous
    and angry, all in a Foam, was ready to swallow her up; and the Ship
    received at that time a Sea on her Starboard-side, which beat over
    all, broke and washed several half Ports, and forced in the entering
    Port. She took in such a vast quantity of Water, that it kept her
    down upon her side, and every Body believ'd, that she could not have
    risen again, had not the Water been speedily let down into the hold
    by scuttling the Decks. During this Consternation two of the
    Lower-Gun-Deck-Ports were pressed open by this mighty weight of
    Water, the most hazardous Accident, next to touching the Ground,
    that could have happened to us. But the Port, that had been forced
    open, being readily secured by the Direction and Command of the
    Vice-Admiral, who, though much indisposed, was upon Deck all that
    time, prevented any farther Mischief. As the Ship still drove with
    the Wind, she was not long in this Shoal, (where it was impossible
    for any Ship to have lived at that time) but came into deeper Water,
    and then she had a smoother Sea. However the Hurricane did not
    abate, but rather seemed to gather Strength. For Words were no
    sooner uttered, but they were carried away by the Wind, so that
    although those upon Deck spoke loud and close to one another, yet
    they could not often distinguish what was said; and when they opened
    their Mouths, their Breath was almost taken away. Part of the Sprit
    Sail, tho' fast furled, was blown away from the Yard. A
    Ten-Oar-Boat, that was lashed on her Starboard-side, was often hove
    up by the Strength of the Wind, and over-set upon her Gun-Wale. We
    plainly saw the Wind skimming up the Water, as if it had been Sand,
    carrying it up into the Air, which was then so thick and gloomy,
    that Day light, which should have been comfortable to us, did, but
    make it appear more ghastly. The Sun by intervals peeped through the
    corner of a Cloud, but soon disappearing, gave us a more
    melancholick Prospect of the Weather. About 11 a Clock it dispersed
    the Clouds, and the Hurricane abated into a more moderate Storm,
    which drove us over to the Bank of _Flanders_, and thence along the
    Coast of _Holland_ and _Friesland_ to the entrance of the Elb, where
    the 4th of _December_ we had almost as violent a Storm, as when we
    drove from our Anchors, the Wind at North West, driving us directly
    upon the Shoar. So that we must all have inevitably perished, had
    not God mercifully favoured us about 10 a Clock at night with a
    South West Wind, which gave us an opportunity to put to Sea. But
    being afterwards driven near the Coast of _Norway_, the Ship wanting
    Anchors and Cables, our Wood and Candles wholly expended; no Beer on
    Board, nor any thing else in lieu; every one reduced to one quart of
    Water _per_ Day, the Men, who had been harrassed at _Belle Isle_;
    and in our _Mediterranean_ Voyage, now jaded by the continual
    Fatigues of the Storms, falling sick every Day, the Vice-Admiral in
    this exigency thought it advisable to put into _Gottenbourgh_, the
    only Port where we could hope to be supplied. We arrived there the
    11th of _December_, and having without lost of time got Anchors and
    Cables from _Copenhagen_, and Provisions from _Gottenbourgh_, we
    sailed thence the Third of _January_, with twelve Merchant Men under
    our Convoy, all loaden with Stores for her Majesty's Navy. The
    Eleventh following we prevented four _French_ Privateers from taking
    four of our Store-Ships. At Night we anchored off the
    _Long-Sand-Head_. Weighed again the next Day, but soon came to an
    Anchor, because it was very hazy Weather. Here we rid against a
    violent Storm, which was like to have put us to Sea. But after three
    Days very bad Weather, we weighed and arrived to the _Buoy of the
    Nore_ the 23d of _January_, having run very great Risks among the
    Sands. For we had not only contrary Winds, but also very tempestuous
    Winds. We lost 28 Men by Sickness, contracted by the Hardships which
    they endur'd in the bad Weather; and had not Sir _Stafford
    Fairborne_ by his great care and diligence, got the Ship out of
    _Gottenbourgh_, and by that prevented her being frozen up, most part
    of the Sailers had perished afterwards by the severity of the
    Winter, which is intolerable Cold in those parts.


A LIST _of such of Her Majesty's Ships, with their Commanders Names, as
were cast away by the Violent Storm on_ Friday _Night the_ 26_th of_
November 1703. _the Wind having been from the_ S.W. _to_ W.S.W. _and
the Storm continuing from about Midnight to past Six in the Morning_.


               |                | _Number of    |       |
               |                | Men before    |       |
   Rates.      |    Ships.      | the Storm._   | Guns. | Commanders.
  -------------+----------------+---------------+-------+---------------
  Fourth--     | Reserve--      |  258          | 54    | John Anderson--
               |                |               |       |
              {| Northumberland |  253          | 70    | James Greenway
  Third--     {| Restoration--  |  386          | 70    | Fleetwood Emes
              {| Sterling       |  349          | 70    | John Johnson--
              {| Castle--       |               |       |
               |                |               |       |
  Fourth--     | Mary--         |  273          | 64    | Rear Admiral
               |                |               |       | Beaumont,
               |                |               |       | Edward Hopson
               |                |               |       |
               | Vigo--         |  212          | 54    | Thomas Long--
  Bomb. Vessel | Mortar--       |   59          | 12    | Raymond Raymond
  Advice Boat  | Eagle--        |   42          | 10    | Nathan Bostock--
  Third--      | Resolution--   |  211          | 70    | Thomas Liell--
  Fourth--     | Newcastle--    |  233          | 46    | William Carter--
  Storeship    | Canterbury--   |   31          |  8    | Thomas Blake--
  Bomb-Vessel  | Portsmouth--   |   44          |  4    | George Hawes--
  -------------+----------------+---------------+-------+---------------


  Commanders.             | Places where   |
                          | lost.          |
  ------------------------+----------------+----------------------------
  John Anderson--         | Yarmouth Roads | Her Captain, Purser, Master,
                          |                | Chyrsurgeon, Clerk and
                          |                | Sixteen Men were Ashoar,
                          |                | the rest drowned.
  James Greenway         }| ---- ----     }| All their men lost.
  Fleetwood Emes         }| ---- ----     }|
  John Johnson--         }| ----           | Third Lieutenant, Chaplain,
                         }|                | Cook Chyrsurgeon's Mate;
                         }|                | four Marine Captains, and
                         }| Goodwin Sands  | sixty-two Men saved.
                         }|                |
  Rear Admiral Beaumont, }| ----           | Only one Man saved by
  Edward Hopson          }|                | Swimming from Wreck to Wreck,
                         }|                | and getting to the Sterling
                         }|                | Castle; the Captain Ashoar,
                         }|                | as also the Purser.
  Thomas Long--           |} Holland--     | Her Company saved except
  Raymond Raymond         |}               | four.
  Nathan Bostock--        | Selsey--      }| Their Officers and Men saved.
  Thomas Liell--          | Pemsey--      }|
  William Carter--        | Drove from     | Carpenter and twenty-three
                          | Spithead and   | Men saved.
                          | lost upon the  |
                          | Coast near     |
                          | Chichester.    |
  Thomas Blake--          | Bristol--      | Captain and twenty-five Men
                          |                | drown'd; the Ship recover'd
                          |                | and order'd to be sold.
  George Hawes--          | Nore--         | Officers and Men lost.
  ------------------------+----------------+----------------------------

The Van Guard, a Second Rate, was over-set at Chatham, but no Men lost,
the Ship not being fitted out.


_Of the Damage to the Navy_

This is a short but terrible Article, there was one Ship called the
_York_, which was lost about 3 days before the great Storm off of
_Harwich_, but most of the Men were saved.

The loss immediately sustain'd in the Royal Navy during the Storm, is
included in the List hereunto annex'd, as appears from the Navy Books.

The damage done to the Ships that were sav'd, is past our Power to
compute. The Admiral, Sir _Cloudesley Shovel_ with the great Ships, had
made sail but the day before out of the _Downs_, and were taken with the
Storm as they lay at or near the _Gunfleet_, where they being well
provided with Anchors and Cables, rid it out, tho' in great extremity,
expecting death every minute.

The loss of small Vessels hir'd into the Service, and tending the Fleet,
is not included in this, nor can well be, several such Vessels, and some
with Soldiers on Board, being driven away to Sea, and never heard of
more.

The loss of the _Light-House_, call'd the _Eddystone_ at _Plymouth_, is
another Article, of which we never heard any particulars other than
this; that at Night it was standing, and in the Morning all the upper
part from the Gallery was blown down, and all the People in it perished,
and by a particular Misfortune, Mr. _Winstanly_, the Contriver of it, a
Person whose loss is very much regreted by such as knew him, as a very
useful Man to his Country: The loss of that _Light-House_ is also a
considerable Damage, as 'tis very doubtful whether it will be ever
attempted again, and as it was a great Security to the Sailors, many a
good Ship having been lost there in former Times.

It was very remarkable, that, as we are inform'd, at the same time the
_Light-House_ abovesaid was blown down, the Model of it in Mr.
_Windstanly_'s House at _Littlebury_ in _Essex_, above 200 Miles from
the _Light-House_, fell down, and was broken to pieces.

There are infinite Stories of like nature with these, the Disasters at
Sea are full of a vast variety, what we have recommended to the view of
the World in this History, may stand as an Abridgment; and the Reader is
only to observe that these are the short Representations, by which he
may guess at the most dreadful Night, these parts of the World ever saw.

To relate all Things, that report Furnishes us with, would be to make
the story exceed common probability, and look like Romance.

Tis a sad and serious Truth, and this part of it is preserv'd to
Posterity to assist them in reflecting on the Judgments of God, and
handing them on for the Ages to come.


_Of the_ Earthquake

Tho' this was some time after the Storm, yet as the Accounts of the
Storm bring it with them in the following Letters, we cannot omit it.

The two following Letters are from the respective Ministers of _Boston_
and _Hull_, and relate to the Account of the Earthquake, which was felt
over most part of the County of _Lincoln_ and the East Riding of
_Yorkshire_.

The Letter from _Hull_, from the Reverend Mr. _Banks_, Minister of the
Place, is very particular, and deserves intire Credit, both from the
extraordinary Character of the worthy Gentleman who writes it, and from
its exact Correspondence with other Accounts.

    _SIR_,

    I receiv'd yours, wherein you acquaint me with a Design that (I
    doubt not) will meet with that Applause and Acceptance from the
    World which it deserves; but am in no capacity to be any way
    serviceable to it my self, the late Hurricane having more frighted
    than hurt us in these Parts. I doubt not but your Intelligence in
    general from the Northern Parts of the Nation, supplies you with as
    little Matter as what you have from these hereabouts, it having been
    less violent and mischievous that way. Some Stacks of Chimneys were
    over-turn'd here, and from one of them a little Child of my own was
    (thanks be to God) almost miraculously preserv'd, with a Maid that
    lay in the Room with him. I hear of none else this way that was so
    much as in danger, the Storm beginning here later than I perceive it
    did in some other Places, its greatest Violence being betwixt 7 and
    8 in the Morning, when most People were stirring.

    The Earthquake, which the Publick Accounts mention to have happen'd
    at _Hull_ and _Lincoln_ upon the 28th _ult._ was felt here by some
    People about 6 in the Evening, at the same time that People there,
    as well as at _Grantham_ and other Places, perceived it. We have
    some flying Stories about it which look like fabulous, whose Credit
    therefore I wou'd not be answerable for; as, that upon
    _Lincoln-Heath_ the Ground was seen to open, and Flashes of Fire to
    issue out of the Chasm.

    I doubt this Account will hardly be thought worth the Charge of
    Passage: Had there been any thing else of note, you had been very
    readily serv'd by,

              SIR, _Your Humble Servant_,
    _Boston_, Jan. 8. 1703.  E.K.


    _SIR_,

    I am afraid that you will believe me very rude, that yours, which I
    receiv'd the 12th of _April_, has not sooner receiv'd such an Answer
    as you expect and desire, and truly I think deserve; for, a Design
    so generous, as to undertake to transmit to Posterity, A Memorial of
    the dreadful Effects of the late terrible Tempest (that when God's
    Judgments are in the World, they may be made so publick, as to
    ingage the Inhabitants of the Earth to learn Righteousness) ought to
    receive all possible Encouragement.

    But the true Reason why I writ no sooner, was, Because, by the most
    diligent Enquiries I cou'd make, I cou'd not learn what Harm that
    dreadful Tempest did in the _Humber_; neither indeed can I yet give
    you any exact Account of it: for, the great Mischief was done in the
    Night; which was so Pitch-dark, that of above 80 Ships that then rid
    in the _Humber_, about _Grimsby_ Road, very few escap'd some Loss or
    other, and none of 'em were able to give a Relation of any body but
    themselves.

    The best Account of the Effects of the Storm in the _Humber_, that I
    have yet met with, I received but Yesterday, from Mr. _Peter Walls_,
    who is Master of that Watch-Tower, call'd the _Spurn-Light_, at the
    _Humber_ Mouth, and was present there on the Night of the 26th of
    _November_, the fatal Night of the Storm.

    He did verily believe that his Pharos (which is above 20 Yards high)
    wou'd have been blown down; and the Tempest made the Fire in it burn
    so vehemently, that it melted down the Iron-bars on which it laid,
    like Lead; so that they were forced, when the Fire was by this means
    almost extinguished, to put in new Bars, and kindle the Fire
    a-fresh, which they kept in till the Morning Light appear'd: And
    then _Peter Walls_ observed about six or seven and twenty Sail of
    Ships, all driving about the _Spurn-Head_, some having cut, others
    broke their Cables, but all disabled, and render'd helpless. These
    were a part of the two Fleets that then lay in the _Humber_, being
    put in there by stress of Weather a day or two before, some from
    _Russia_, and the rest of 'em _Colliers_, to and from _Newcastle_.
    Of these, three were driven upon an Island call'd the _Den_, within
    the _Spurn_ in the Mouth of the _Humber_.

    The first of these no sooner touch'd Ground, but she over-set, and
    turn'd up her Bottom; out of which, only one of six (the Number of
    that Ship's Company) was lost, being in the Shrowds: the other five
    were taken up by the second Ship, who had sav'd their Boat. In this
    Boat were saved all the Men of the three Ships aforementioned
    (except as before excepted) and came to Mr. _Walls_'s House, at the
    _Spurn-Head_, who got them good Fires, and all Accommodations
    necessary for them in such a Distress. The second Ship having no
    body aboard, was driven to Sea, with the Violence of the Tempest,
    and never seen or heard of more. The third, which was then a-ground,
    was (as he supposes) broken up and driven; for nothing, but some
    Coals that were in her, was to be seen the next Morning.

    Another Ship, the Day after, _viz._ the 27th of _November_, was
    riding in _Grimsby_ Road, and the Ships Company (except two Boys)
    being gone a-shore, the Ship, with the two Lads in her, drive
    directly out of _Humber_, and was lost, tho' 'tis verily believ'd
    the two Boys were saved by one of the _Russia_ Ships, or Convoys.

    The same Day, in the Morning, one _John Baines_, a _Yarmouth_
    Master, was in his Ship, riding in _Grimsby_ Road, and by the
    Violence of the Storm, some other Ships coming foul upon him, part
    of his Ship was broken down, and was driven towards Sea; whereupon
    he anchored under _Kilnsey-Land_, and with his Crew came safe
    a-shore, in his Boat, but the Ship was never seen more.

    The remainder of the six or seven and twenty Sail aforesaid, being
    (as was before observed) driven out of the _Humber_, very few, if
    any of 'em, were ever heard of; and 'tis rationally believ'd, that
    all, or the most of them, perished. And indeed, altho' the Storm was
    not so violent here as it was about _Portsmouth_, _Yarmouth_ Roads,
    and the Southern Coast, yet the Crews of the three Ships
    above-mentioned declare, that they were never out in so dismal a
    Night as that was of the 26th of _November_, in which the
    considerable Fleet aforesaid rid in _Grimsby_ Road in the _Humber_;
    for most of the 80 Sail broke from their Anchors, and run foul one
    upon another; but by reason of the Darkness of the Night, they cou'd
    see very little of the Mischief that was done.

    This is the best Account I can give you at present of the Effects of
    the Tempest in the _Humber_; whereas had the Enquiry been made
    immediately after the Storm was over, a great many more of
    remarkable Particulars might have been discover'd.

    As to the Earthquake here, tho' I perceiv'd it not my self (being
    then walking to visit a sick Parishoner) yet it was so sensibly felt
    by so many Hundreds, that I cannot in the least question the Truth
    and Certainty of it.

    It happen'd here, and in these Parts, upon _Innocent_'s Day, the
    28th of _December_, being _Tuesday_, about Five of the Clock in the
    Evening, or thereabout. Soon after I gave as particular Account as I
    cou'd learn of it, to that ingenious Antiquary Mr. _Thorsby_ of
    _Leeds_ in _Yorkshire_, but had no time to keep a Copy of my Letter
    to him, nor have I leisure to transcribe a Copy of this to you,
    having so constant a Fatigue of Parochial business to attend; nor
    will my Memory serve me to recollect all the Circumstances of that
    Earthquake, as I sent them to Mr. _Thoresby_; and possibly he may
    have communicated that Letter to you, or will upon your least
    intimation, being a generous Person, who loves to communicate any
    thing that may be serviceable to the Publick.

    However, lest I shou'd seem to decline the gratifying your Request,
    I will recollect, and here set down, such of the Circumstances of
    that Earthquake as do at present occur to my Memory.

    It came with a Noise like that of a Coach in the Streets, and
    mightily shak'd both the Glass Windows, Pewter, _China_ Pots and
    Dishes, and in some places threw them down off the Shelves on which
    they stood. It did very little Mischief in this Town, except the
    throwing down a Piece of one Chimney. Several Persons thought that a
    great Dog was got under the Chair they sat upon; and others fell
    from their Seats, for fear of falling. It frighted several Persons,
    and caus'd 'em for a while to break off their Reading, or Writing,
    or what they were doing.

    They felt but one Shake here: but a Gentleman in _Nottinghamshire_
    told me, that being then lame upon his Bed, he felt three Shakes,
    like the three Rocks of a Cradle, to and again.

    At _Laceby_ in _Lincolnshire_, and in several other Parts of that
    County, as well as of the Counties of _York_ and _Nottingham_, the
    Earthquake was felt very sensibly; and particularly at _Laceby_
    aforesaid. There happen'd this remarkable Story.

    On _Innocent_'s Day, in the Afternoon, several Morrice-Dancers came
    thither from _Grimsby_; and after they had Danc'd and play'd their
    Tricks, they went towards _Alesby_, a little Town not far off: and
    as they were going about Five a Clock, they felt two such terrible
    Shocks of the Earth, that they had much ado to hold their Feet, and
    thought the Ground was ready to open, and swallow 'em up. Whereupon
    thinking that God was angry at 'em for playing the Fool, they
    return'd immediately to _Laceby_ in a great Fright, and the next Day
    home, not daring to pursue their intended Circuit and Dancing.

    I think 'tis the Observation of Dr. _Willis_, that upon an
    Earthquake the Earth sends forth noisome Vapours which infect the
    Air, as the Air does our Bodies: and accordingly it has prov'd here,
    where we have ever since had a most sickly time, and the greatest
    Mortality that has been in this Place for 15 Years last past: and so
    I believe it has been over the greatest part of _England_. This,
    SIR, is the best Account I can give you of the Earthquake, which had
    com'd sooner, but that I was desirous to get likewise the best
    Account I cou'd of the Effects of the Storm in the _Humber_. My
    humble Service to the Undertakers: and if in any thing I am capable
    to serve them or you, please freely to command,

      SIR, _Your most humble Servant_,
                             Ro. Banks.

We have a farther Account of this in two Letters from Mr. _Thoresby_,
F.R.S. and written to the Publisher of the Philosophical Transactions,
and printed in their Monthly Collection, No. 289. as follows, which is
the same mentioned by Mr. _Banks_.


_Part of two Letters from Mr._ Thoresby, F.R.S. _to the Publisher,
concerning an Earthquake, which happen'd in some Places of the North of_
England, _the 28th of_ December 1703.

    You have heard, no doubt, of the late _Earthquake_ that affected
    some part of the North, as the dreadful Storm did the South. It
    being most observable at _Hull_, I was desirous of an Account from
    thence that might be depended upon; and therefore writ to the very
    obliging Mr. _Banks_, Prebendary of _York_, who being Vicar of
    _Hull_, was the most suitable Person I knew to address my self unto:
    and he being pleased to favour me with a judicious Account of it, I
    will venture to communicate it to you, with his pious Reflection
    thereupon. 'As to the Earthquake you mention, it was felt here on
    _Tuesday_ the 28th of the last Month, which was _Childermas_ Day,
    about three or four Minutes after Five in the Evening. I confess I
    did not feel it my self; for I was at that moment walking to visit a
    sick Gentleman, and the Noise in the Streets, and my quick Motion,
    made it impossible, I believe, for me to feel it: but it was so
    almost universally felt, that there can be no manner of doubt of the
    Truth of it.

    Mr. _Peers_, my Reader, (who is an ingenious good Man) was then at
    his Study, and Writing; but the heaving up of his Chair and his
    Desk, the Shake of his Chamber, and the rattling of his Windows, did
    so amaze him, that he was really affrighted, and was forc'd for a
    while to give over his Work: and there are twenty such Instances
    amongst Tradesmen, too tedious to repeat. My Wife was then in her
    Closet, and thought her _China_ would have come about her Ears, and
    my Family felt the Chairs mov'd, in which they were sitting by the
    Kitchen Fire-side, and heard such a Rattle of the Pewter and Windows
    as almost affrighted them. A Gentlewoman not far off said, her Chair
    lifted so high, that she thought the great Dog had got under it, and
    to save her self from falling, slipt off her Chair. I sent to a
    House where part of a Chimney was shak'd down, to enquire of the
    particulars; they kept Ale, and being pretty full of Company that
    they were merry, they did not perceive the Shock, only heard the
    Pewter and Glass-windows dance; but the Landlady's Mother, who was
    in a Chamber by her self, felt the Shock so violent, that she verily
    believed the House to be coming down (as part of the Chimney afore
    mention'd did at the same Moment) and cried out in a Fright, and had
    fall'n, but that she catched hold of a Table. It came and went
    suddenly, and was attended with a Noise like the Wind, though there
    was then a perfect Calm.'

    From other Hands I have an Account that it was felt in _Beverly_,
    and other Places; at _South Dalton_ particularly, where the Parson's
    Wife (my own Sister) being alone in her Chamber, was sadly frighted
    with the heaving up of the Chair she sat in, and the very sensible
    Shake of the Room, especially the Windows, _&c._ A Relation of mine,
    who is a Minister near _Lincoln_, being then at a Gentleman's House
    in the Neighbourhood, was amaz'd at the Moving of the Chairs they
    sat upon, which was so violent, he writes every Limb of him was
    shaken; I am told also from a true Hand, that so nigh us as _Selby_,
    where Mr. _Travers_, a Minister, being in his Study writing, was
    interrupted much as Mr. _Peers_ above-mentioned; which minds me of
    worthy Mr. _Bank_'s serious Conclusion. 'And now I hope you will not
    think it unbecoming my Character to make this Reflection upon it,
    _viz._ that Famines, Pestilences and Earthquakes, are joyned by our
    Blessed Saviour, as portending future Calamities, and particularly
    the Destruction of _Jerusalem_ and the _Jewish_ State; if not the
    End of the World, St. _Matth._ 24. 7. And if, as Philosophers
    observe, those gentler Convulsions within the Bowels of the Earth,
    which give the Inhabitants but an easie Jog, do usually portend the
    Approach of some more dreadful Earthquake; then surely we have
    Reason to fear the worst, because I fear we so well deserve it, and
    pray God of his infinite Mercy to avert his future Judgments.'

       *       *       *       *       *

    Since my former Account of the Earthquake at _Hull_, my Cousin
    _Cookson_ has procured to me the following Account from his Brother,
    who is a Clergyman near _Lincoln_, viz, That he, being about Five in
    the Evening, _December_ the 20th past, set with a neighbouring
    Minister at his House about a Mile from _Navenby_, they were
    surpriz'd with a sudden Noise, as if it had been of two or three
    Coaches driven furiously down the Yard, whereupon the Servant was
    sent to the Door, in Expectation of some Strangers; but they quickly
    perceived what it was, by the shaking of the Chairs they sat upon;
    they could perceive the very Stones move: the greatest Damage was to
    the Gentlewoman of the House, who was put into such a Fright, that
    she miscarried two Days after. He writes, they were put into a
    greater Fright upon the Fast-day; when there was so violent a Storm,
    they verily thought the Church would have fallen upon them. We had
    also at _Leedes_ a much greater Storm the Night preceding the Fast,
    and a stronger Wind that Day, than when the fatal Storm was in the
    South; but a good Providence timed this well, to quicken our too
    cold Devotions.




_Of remarkable_ Deliverances


As the sad and remarkable Disasters of this Terrible Night were full of
a Dismal Variety, so the Goodness of Providence, in the many remarkable
Deliverances both by Sea and Land, have their Share in this Account, as
they claim an equal Variety and Wonder.

The Sense of extraordinary Deliverances, as it is a Mark of Generous
Christianity, so I presume 'tis the best Token, that a good Use is made
of the Mercies receiv'd.

The Persons, who desire a thankful Acknowledgement should be made to
their Merciful Deliverer, and the Wonders of his Providence remitted to
Posterity, shall never have it to say, that the Editor of this Book
refus'd to admit so great a Subject a Place in these Memoirs; and
therefore, with all imaginable Freedom, he gives the World the
Particulars from their own Mouths, and under their own Hands.

The first Account we have from the Reverend Mr. _King_, Lecturer at St.
_Martins_ in the Fields, as follows.

    _SIR_,

    The short Account I now send to shew the Providence of God in the
    late Dreadful Storm, (if yet it comes not too late) I had from the
    Mouth of the Gentleman himself, Mr. _Woodgate Gisser_ by Name, who
    is a Neighbour of mine, living in St. _Martin's-street_ in the
    Parish of St. _Martins_ in the Fields, and a Sufferer in the common
    Calamity; is as follows, _viz._

    Between Two and Three of the Clock in the Morning, my Neighbour's
    Stack of Chimneys fell, and broke down the Roof of my Garret into
    the Passage going up and down Stairs; upon which, I thought it
    convenient to retire into the Kitchen with my Family; where we had
    not been above a Quarter of an Hour, before my Wife sent her Maid to
    fetch some Necessaries out of a Back Parlour Closet, and as she had
    shut the Door, and was upon her Return, the very same Instant my
    Neighbour's Stack of Chimneys, on the other Side of the House, fell
    upon my Stack, and beat in the Roof, and so drove down the several
    Floors through the Parlour into the Kitchen, where the Maid was
    buried near Five Hours in the Rubbish, without the least Damage or
    Hurt whatsoever: This her miraculous Preservation was occasion'd
    (as, I afterwards with Surprize found) by her falling into a small
    Cavity near the Bed, and afterwards (as she declar'd) by her
    creeping under the Tester that lay hollow by Reason of some Joices
    that lay athwart each other, which prevented her perishing in the
    said Rubbish: About Eight in the Morning, when I helped her out of
    the Ruins, and asked her how she did, and why she did not cry out
    for Assistance, since she was not (as I suppos'd she had been) dead,
    and so to let me know she was alive; her Answer was, that truly she
    for her Part had felt no Hurt, and was not the least affrighted, but
    lay quiet; and which is more, even slumbred until then.

    The Preservation of my self, and the rest of my Family, about Eleven
    in Number, was, next to the Providence of God, occasion'd by our
    running into a Vault almost level with the Kitchen upon the Noise
    and Alarm of the Falling of the Chimneys, which breaking through
    three Floors, and about two Minutes in passing, gave us the
    Opportunities of that Retreat. Pray accept of this short Account
    from

      _Your Humble Servant, and Lecturer_,
      Feb. 12. 1703.         James King, _M.A._

Another is from a Reverend Minister at ---- whose Name is to his Letter
as follows.

    _SIR_,

    I thank you for your charitable Visit not long since; I could have
    heartily wish'd your Business would have permitted you to have made
    a little longer Stay at the parsonage, and then you might have taken
    a stricter View of the Ruins by the late terrible Wind. Seeing you
    are pleas'd to desire from me a more particular Account of that sad
    Disaster; I have for your fuller Satisfaction sent you the best I am
    able to give; and if it be not so perfect, and so exact a one, as
    you may expect, you may rely upon me it is a true, and a faithful
    one, and that I do not impose upon you, or the World in the least in
    any Part of the following Relation. I shall not trouble you with the
    Uneasiness the Family was under all the fore Part of the Evening,
    even to a Fault, as I thought, and told them, I did not then
    apprehend the Wind to be much higher than it had been often on other
    Times; but went to Bed, hoping we were more afraid than we needed to
    have been: when in Bed, we began to be more sensible of it, and lay
    most of the Night awake, dreading every Blast till about Four of the
    Clock in the Morning, when to our thinking it seemed a little to
    abate; and then we fell asleep, and slept till about Six of the
    Clock, at which Time my Wife waking, and calling one of her Maids to
    rise, and come to the Children, the Maid rose, and hasten'd to her;
    she had not been up above Half an Hour, but all on the sudden we
    heard a prodigious Noise, as if part of the House had been fallen
    down; I need not tell you the Consternation we were all in upon this
    Alarm; in a Minutes Time, I am sure, I was surrounded with all my
    Infantry, that I thought I should have been overlay'd; I had not
    even Power to stir one Limb of me, much less to rise, though I could
    not tell how to lie in Bed. The Shrieks and the Cries of my dear
    Babes perfectly stun'd me; I think I hear them still in my Ears, I
    shall not easily, I am confident, if ever, forget them. There I lay
    preaching Patience to those little Innocent Creatures, till the Day
    began to appear.

    _Preces & Lachrimcæ_, Prayers and Tears, the Primitive Christians
    Weapons, we had great Plenty of to defend us withal; but had the
    House all fallen upon our Heads, we were in that Fright as we could
    scarce have had Power to rise for the present, or do any thing for
    our Security. Upon our rising, and sending a Servant to view what
    she could discover, we soon understood that the Chimney was fallen
    down, and that with its Fall it had beaten down a great part of that
    End of the House, _viz._ the Upper Chamber, and the Room under it,
    which was the Room I chose for my Study: The Chimney was thought as
    strong, and as well built as most in the Neighbourhood; and it
    surpriz'd the Mason (whom I immediately sent for to view it) to see
    it down: but that which was most surprizing to me, was the Manner of
    its Falling; had it fallen almost any other Way than that it did, it
    must in all Likelihood have killed the much greater part of my
    Family, for no less than Nine of us lay at that End of the House, my
    Wife and Self, and Five Children, and Two Servants, a Maid, and a
    Man then in my Pay, and so a Servant, though not by the Year: The
    Bed my Eldest Daughter and the Maid lay in joyned as near as
    possible to the Chimney, and it was within a very few Yards of the
    Bed that we lay in; so that as _David_ said to _Jonathan_, there
    seem'd to be but one single Step between Death and us, to all
    outward Appearance. One Thing I cannot omit, which was very
    remarkable and surprizing: It pleased God so to order it, that in
    the Fall of the House two great Spars seem'd to fall so as to pitch
    themselves on an End, and by that Means to support that other Part
    of the House which adjoined to the Upper Chamber; or else in all
    Likelihood, that must also have fallen too at the same Time. The
    Carpenter (whom we sent for forthwith) when he came, ask'd who
    plac'd those two Supporters, supposing somebody had been there
    before him; and when he was told, those two Spars in the Fall so
    plac'd themselves, he could scarce believe it possible; it was done
    so artificially, that he declar'd, they scarce needed to have been
    removed.

    In short, Sir, it is impossible to describe the Danger we were in;
    you your self was an Eye-witness of some Part of what is here
    related; and I once more assure you, the whole Account I have here
    given you is true, and what can be attested by the whole Family.
    None of all those unfortunate Persons who are said to have been
    killed with the Fall of a Chimney, could well be much more expos'd
    to Danger than we were; it is owing wholly to that watchful
    Providence to whom we all are indebted for every Minute of our
    Lives, that any of us escaped; none but he who never sleeps nor
    slumbers could have secured us. I beseech Almighty God to give us
    All that due Sense as we ought to have of so great and so general
    Calamity; that we truly repent us of those Sins that have so long
    provoked his Wrath against us, and brought down so heavy a Judgment
    as this upon us. O that we were so wise as to consider it, and to
    _sin no more lest a worse thing come upon us_! That it may have this
    happy Effect upon all the sinful Inhabitants of this Land is, and
    shall be, the Dayly Prayer of Dear Sir,

      _Your real Friend and Servant_,
                            John Gipps.

Another Account from a Reverend Minister in _Dorsetshire_, take as
follows, _viz._

    _SIR_,

    As you have desired an Account of the Disasters occasion'd by the
    late Tempest, (which I can assure you was in these Parts very
    Terrible) so I think my self oblig'd to let you know, that there was
    a great Mixture of Mercy with it: For though the Hurricane was
    frightful, and very mischievous, yet God's gracious Providence was
    therein very remarkable, in restraining its Violence from an
    universal Destruction: for then there was a Commotion of the
    Elements of Air, Earth and Water, which then seemed to outvie each
    other in Mischief; for (in _David_'s Expression, 2 _Sam._ 22. 8.)
    _The Earth trembled and quak'd, the Foundations of the Heavens mov'd
    and shook, because God was angry_: and yet, when all was given over
    for lost, we found our selves more scar'd than hurt; for our Lives
    was given us for a Prey, and the Tempest did us only so much Damage,
    as to make us sensible that it might have done us a great deal more,
    had it not been rebuk'd by the God of Mercy; the Care of whose
    Providence has been visibly seen in our wonderful Preservations. My
    Self and Three more of this Parish were then strangely rescued from
    the Grave: I narrowly escaped with my Life, where I apprehended
    nothing of Danger; for going out about Midnight to give Orders to my
    Servants to secure the House, and Reeks of Corn and Furses from
    being blown all away; as soon as I mov'd out of the Place were I
    stood, I heard something of a great Weight fall close behind me, and
    a little after going out with a Light, to see what it was, I found
    it to be the great Stone which covered the Top of my Chimney to keep
    out the Wet; it was almost a Yard square, and very thick, weighing
    about an Hundred and Fifty Pound. It was blown about a Yard off from
    the Chimney, and fell Edge-long, and cut the Earth, about four
    Inches deep, exactly between my Foot-steps; and a little after,
    whilst sitting under the Clavel of my Kitchen Chimney, and reaching
    out my Arm for some Fewel to mend the Fire, I was again strangely
    preserved from being knock'd on the Head by a Stone of great Weight;
    it being about a Foot long, Half a Foot broad, and two Inches thick:
    for as soon as I had drawn in my Arm, I felt something brush against
    my Elbow, and presently I heard the Stone fall close by my Foot, a
    third Part of which was broken off by the Violence of the Fall, and
    skarr'd my Ancle, but did not break the Skin; it had certainly
    killed me, had it fallen while my Arm was extended. The Top of my
    Wheat Rick was blown off, and some of the Sheaves were carried a
    Stones Cast, and with that Violence, that one of them, at that
    Distance, struck down one _Daniel Fookes_ a late Servant of the Lady
    _Napier_, and so forceably, that he was taken up dead, and to all
    Appearance remain'd so a great while; but at last was happily
    recover'd to Life again. His Mother, poor Widow, was at the same
    time more fatally threatned at Home, and her Bed had certainly
    prov'd her Grave, had not the first Noise awaken'd and scar'd her
    out of Bed; and she was scarce gotten to the Door, when the House
    fell all in: The Smith's Wife likewise being scar'd at such a Rate,
    leapt out of Bed, with the little Child in her Arms, and ran hastily
    out of Doors naked, without Hose or Shooes, to a Neighbour's House;
    and by that hasty Flight, both their Lives were wonderfully
    preserved. The Sheets of Lead on _Lytton_ Church, were rolled up
    like Sheets of Parchment, and blown off to a great Distance. At
    _Strode_, a large Apple Tree, being about a Foot in Square, was
    broken off cleverly like a Stick, about four Foot from the Root, and
    carried over an Hedge about ten Foot high; and cast, as if darted,
    (with the Trunk forward) above fourteen Yards off. And I am credibly
    inform'd, that at _Ellwood_ in the Parish of _Abbotsbury_, a large
    Wheat Rick (belonging to one _Jolyffe_) was cleverly blown, with its
    Staddle, off from the Stones, and set down on the Ground in very
    good Order. I would fain know of the Atheist what mov'd his
    _Omnipotent Matter_ to do such Mischief, _&c._

                               SIR, _I am,
      Your Affectionate Friend and Servant,
                           though unknown_,

      Jacob Cole, _Rect. of_ Swyre in County of _Dorset_.

This Account is very remarkable, and well attested, and the Editor of
this Collection can vouch to the Reputation of the Relators, tho' not to
the Particulars of the Story.

_A great Preservation in the late Storm_

    About Three of the Clock in the Morning, the Violence of the Wind
    blew down a Stack of Chimneys belonging to the dwelling House of Dr.
    _Gideon Harvey_, (situate in St. _Martin_'s Lane over against the
    Street End) on the back Part of the next House, wherein dwells Mr.
    _Robert Richards_ an Apothecary, at the Sign of the Unicorn; and
    Capt. _Theodore Collier_ and his Family lodges in the same. The
    Chimney fell with that Force as made them pierce thro' the Roofs and
    all the Floors, carrying them down quite to the Ground. The two
    Families, consisting of Fourteen, Men, Women, and Children, besides
    Three that came in from the next House, were at that Instant
    dispos'd of as follows, a Footman that us'd to lie in the back
    Garret, had not a Quarter of an Hour before remov'd himself into the
    fore Garret, by which means he escap'd the Danger: In the Room under
    that lay Capt. _Collier_'s Child, of Two Months old, in Bed with the
    Nurse, and a Servant Maid lay on the Bed by her; the Nurse's Child
    lying in a Cribb by the Bed-side, which was found, with the Child
    safe in it, in the Kitchen, where the Nurse and Maid likewise found
    themselves; their Bed being shatter'd in Pieces, and they a little
    bruis'd by falling down Three Stories: Capt. _Collier_'s Child was
    in about Two Hours found unhurt in some Pieces of the Bed and
    Curtains, which had fallen through Two Floors only, and hung on some
    broken Rafters in that Place, which was the Parlour: In the Room
    under This, being one Pair of Stairs from the Street, and two from
    the Kitchen, was Capt. _Collier_ in his Bed, and his Wife just by
    the Bed-side, and her Maid a little behind her, who likewise found
    her self in the Kitchin a little bruis'd, and ran out to cry for
    Help for her Master and Mistress, who lay buried under the Ruins:
    Mrs. _Collier_ was, by the timely Aid of Neighbours who remov'd the
    Rubbish from her, taken out in about Half an Hours Time, having
    receiv'd no Hurt but the Fright, and an Arm a little bruis'd: Capt.
    _Collier_ in about Half an Hour more was likewise taken out unhurt.
    In the Parlour were sitting Mr. _Richards_ with his Wife, the Three
    Neighbours, and the rest of his Family, a little Boy of about a Year
    old lying in the Cradle, they all run out at the first Noise, and
    escap'd, Mrs. _Richards_ staying a little longer than the rest, to
    pull the Cradle with her child in it along with her, but the House
    fell too suddenly on it, and buried the Child under the Ruins, a
    Rafter fell on her Foot, and bruis'd it a little, at which she
    likewise made her Escape, and brought in the Neighbours, who soon
    uncovered the Head of the Cradle, and cutting it off, took the Child
    out alive and well. This wonderful Preservation being worthy to be
    transmitted to Posterity, we do attest to be true in every
    Particular. Witness our Hands,

                      _Gideon Harvey._
      _London_,       _Theo. Collier._
      Nov. 27. 1703.  _Robert Richards._

These Accounts of like Nature are particularly attested by Persons of
known Reputation and Integrity.

    _SIR_,

    In order to promote the good Design of your Book, in perpetuating
    the Memory of God's signal Judgment on this Nation, by the late
    dreadful Tempest of Wind, which has hurl'd so many Souls into
    Eternity; and likewise his Providence in the miraculous Preservation
    of several Persons Lives, who were expos'd to the utmost Hazards in
    that Hurricane: I shall here give you a short but true Instance of
    the latter, which several Persons can witness besides my self; and
    if you think proper may insert the same in the Book you design for
    that Purpose; which is as follows. At the _Saracen_'s Head in
    _Friday_ Street, a Country Lad lodging three Pair of Stairs next the
    Roof of the House, was wonderfully preserv'd from Death; for about
    Two a Clock that _Saturday_ Morning the 27th of _November_, (which
    prov'd fatal to so many) there fell a Chimney upon the Roof, under
    which he lay, and beat it down through the Ceiling (the Weight of
    the Tiles, Bricks, _&c._ being judged by a Workman to be about Five
    Hundred Weight) into the Room, fell exactly between the Beds Feet
    and Door of the Room, which are not Two Yards distance from each
    other, it being but small: the sudden Noise awaking the Lad, he
    jumps out of Bed endeavouring to find the Door, but was stopt by the
    great Dust and falling of more Bricks, _&c._ and finding himself
    prevented, in this Fear he got into Bed again, and remain'd there
    till the Day Light, (the Bricks and Tiles still falling
    between-whiles about his Bed) and then got up without any Hurt, or
    so much as a Tile or Brick falling on the Bed; the only thing he
    complain'd of to me, was his being almost choak'd with Dust when he
    got out of Bed, or put his Head out from under the Cloaths: There
    was a great Weight of Tiles and Bricks, which did not break through,
    as the Workmen inform me, just over the Beds Tester, enough to have
    crush'd him to Death, if they had fallen: Thus he lay safe among the
    Dangers that threatned him, whilst wakeful Providence preserv'd him.
    And SIR, if this be worthy your taking Notice of, I am ready to
    justify the same. In Witness whereof, here is my Name,

      Dec. 3. 1703.       _Henry Mayers._


_A great Preservation in the late Storm_

    _William Phelps_ and _Frances_ his Wife, living at the Corner of
    _Old Southampton Buildings_, over against _Gray's-Inn Gate_ in
    _Holborn_, they lying up three pair of Stairs, in the Backroom, that
    was only lath'd and plaister'd, he being then very ill, she was
    forc'd to lie in a Table-Bed in the same Room: about One a Clock in
    the Morning, on the 27th of _November_ last, the Wind blew down a
    Stack of Chimneys of seven Funnels that stood very high; which broke
    through the Roof, and fell into the Room, on her Bed; so that she
    was buried alive, as one may say: she crying out, _Mr._ Phelps,
    _Mr._ Phelps, _the House is fall'n upon me_, there being so much on
    her that one could but just hear her speak; a Coachman and a Footman
    lying on the same Floor, I soon call'd them to my Assistance. We all
    fell to work, tho' we stood in the greatest Danger; and through the
    Goodness of God we did take her out, without the least hurt; neither
    was any of us hurt, tho' there was much fell after we took her out.
    And when we took the Bricks off the Bed the next Morning, we found
    the Frame of the Bed on which she lay broke all to pieces.

      _William Phelps._


    _Another great Preservation_

    Mr. _John Hanson_, Register of _Eaton College_, being at _London_
    about his Affairs, and lying that dreadful Night, _Nov._ 26, at the
    _Bell-Savage Inn_ on _Ludgate Hill_, was, by the Fall of a Stack of
    Chimneys (which broke through the Roof, and beat down two Floors
    above him, and also that in which he lay) carried in his Bed down to
    the Ground, without the least hurt, his Cloaths, and every thing
    besides in the Room, being buried in the Rubbish; it having pleased
    God so to order it, that just so much of the Floor and Ceiling of
    the Room (from which he fell) as covered his Bed, was not broken
    down. Of this great Mercy he prays he may live for ever mindful, and
    be for ever thankful to Almighty God.

    _SIR_,

    The Design of your Collecting the remarkable Accidents of the late
    Storm coming to my Hands, I thought my self obliged to take this
    Opportunity of making a publick Acknowledgment of the wonderful
    Providence of Heaven to me, namely, the Preservation of my only
    Child from imminent Danger.

    Two large Stacks of Chimneys, containing each five Funnels, beat
    through the Roof, in upon the Bed where she lay, without doing her
    the least Harm, the Servant who lay with her being very much
    bruised. There were several Loads of Rubbish upon the Bed before my
    Child was taken out of it.

    This extraordinary Deliverance I desire always thankfully to
    remember.

    I was so nearly touch'd by this Accident, that I could not take so
    much notice as I intended of this Storm; yet I observ'd the Wind
    gradually to encrease from One a Clock till a Quarter after Five, or
    thereabouts: at which time it seem'd to be at the highest; when
    every Gust did not only return with greater Celerity, but also with
    more Force.

    From about a Quarter before Six it sensibly decreas'd. I went often
    to the Door, at which times I observ'd, that every Gust was preceded
    by small Flashes, which, to my Observation, did not dart
    perpendicularly, but seem'd rather to skim along the Surface of the
    Ground; nor did they appear to be of the same kind with the common
    Light'ning Flashes.

    I must confess I cannot help thinking that the Earth it self
    suffer'd some Convulsion; and that for this Reason, because several
    Springs, for the space of 48 Hours afterwards, were very muddy,
    which were never known to be so by any Storm of Wind or Rain before:
    nor indeed is it possible, they lying so low, could be affected by
    any thing less than a Concussion of the Earth it self.

    How far these small Hints may be of use to the more ingenious
    Enquirers into this matter, I shall humbly leave to their
    Consideration, and subscribe my self,

      SIR, _Your humble Servant_,
                        Joseph Clench,

                _Apothecary in_ Jermyn _Street_, _near_ St. James's.
      _Dec._ 8, 1703.


    _SIR_,

    This comes to let you know that I received yours in the _Downs_, for
    which I thank you. I expected to have seen you in _London_ before
    now, had we not met with a most violent Storm in our way to
    _Chatham_. On the 27th of the last Month, about Three of the Clock
    in the Morning, we lost all our Anchors and drove to Sea: about Six
    we lost our Rother, and were left in a most deplorable condition to
    the merciless Rage of the Wind and Seas: we also sprung a Leak, and
    drove 48 Hours expecting to perish. But it pleased God to give us a
    wonderful Deliverance, scarce to be parallell'd in History; for
    about Midnight we were drove into shoul Water, and soon after our
    Ship struck upon the Sands: the Sea broke over us, we expected every
    minute that she would drop to pieces, and that we should all be
    swallowed up in the Deep; but in less than two hours time we drove
    over the Sands, and got (without Rother or Pilot, or any Help but
    Almighty God's) into this Place, where we run our Ship on shore, in
    order to save our Lives: but it has pleased God also, far beyond our
    expectation, to save our Ship, and bring us safe off again last
    Night. We shall remain here a considerable while to refit our Ship,
    and get a new Rother. Our Deliverance is most remarkable, that in
    the middle of a dark Night we should drive over a Sand where a Ship
    that was not half our Bigness durst not venture to come in the Day;
    and then, without knowing where we were, drive into a narrow place
    where we have saved both Lives and Ship. I pray God give us all
    Grace to be thankful, and never forget so great a mercy.

      I am,

      _Your affectionate Friend and humble Servant_,
      _Russell_, at _Helversluce_ in
      _Holland_, Dec. 16. 1703.            Henry Barclay.


    _SIR_

    According to the publick Notice, I send you two or three
    Observations of mine upon the late dreadful Tempest: As,

    1. In the Parish of St. _Mary Cray, Kent_, a poor Man, with his Wife
    and Child, were but just gone out of their Bed, when the Head of
    their House fell in upon it; which must have kill'd them.

    2. A great long Stable in the Town, near the Church, was blown off
    the Foundation entirely at one sudden Blast, from the West-side to
    the East, and cast out into the High-way, over the Heads of five
    Horses, and a Carter feeding them at the same time, and not one of
    them hurt, nor the Rack or Manger touch'd, which are yet standing to
    the Admiration of all Beholders.

    3. As the Church at _Heyes_ received great Damage, so the Spire,
    with one Bell in it, were blown away over the Church yard.

    4. The Minister of _South-Ash_ had a great Deliverance from a
    Chimney falling in upon his Bed just as he rose, and hurt only his
    Feet; as blessed be God, our Lives have been all very miraculously
    preserv'd, tho' our Buildings every where damag'd. You may depend on
    all, as certify'd by me,

                           Thomas Watts,
      _Vicar of_ Orpington _and St._ Mary Cray.

There are an innumerable variety of Deliverances, besides these, which
deserve a Memorial to future Ages; but these are noted from the Letters,
and at the Request of the Persons particularly concern'd.

Particularly, 'tis a most remarkable Story of a Man belonging to the
_Mary_, a fourth Rate Man of War, lost upon the _Goodwin Sands_; and
all the Ship's Company but himself being lost, he, by the help of a
piece of the broken Ship, got a-board the _Northumberland_; but the
Violence of the Storm continuing, the _Northumberland_ ran the same fate
with the _Mary_, and coming on shore upon the same Sand, was split to
pieces by the Violence of the Sea: and yet this Person, by a singular
Providence, was one of the 64 that were delivered by a _Deal Hooker_ out
of that Ship, all the rest perishing in the Sea.

A poor Sailor of _Brighthelmston_ was taken up after he had hung by his
Hands and Feet on the top of a Mast 48 hours, the Sea raging so high,
that no Boat durst go near him.

A Hoy run on shore on the Rocks in _Milford_ Haven, and just splitting
to pieces (as by Captain _Soam_'s Letter) a Boat drove by, being broke
from another Vessel, with no body in it, and came so near the Vessel, as
that two Men jumpt into it, and sav'd their Lives: the Boy could not
jump so far, and was drowned.

Five Sailors shifted three Vessels on an Island near the _Humber_ and
were at last sav'd by a Long-boat out of the fourth.

A Waterman in the River of _Thames_ lying asleep in the Cabbin of a
Barge, at or near _Black-Fryers_, was driven thro' Bridge in the Storm,
and the Barge went of her self into the _Tower-Dock_, and lay safe on
shore; the Man never wak'd, nor heard the Storm, till 'twas Day; and, to
his great Astonishment, he found himself safe as above.

Two Boys in the _Poultry_ lodging in a Garret or Upper-room, were, by
the Fall of Chimneys, which broke thro' the Floors, carried quite to the
bottom of the Cellar, and receiv'd no Damage at all.

    _SIR_,

    At my Return home on _Saturday_ at Night, I receiv'd yours: and
    having said nothing in my last concerning the Storm, I send this to
    tell you, that I hear of nothing done by it in this Country that may
    seem to deserve a particular Remark. Several Houses and Barns were
    stript of their Thatch, some Chimneys and Gables blown down, and
    several Stacks of Corn and Hay very much dispers'd; but I hear not
    of any Persons either kill'd or maim'd. A Neighbour of ours was
    upon the Ridge of his Barn endeavouring to secure the Thatch, and
    the Barn at that instant was overturn'd by the Storm; but by the
    good Providence of God, the Man received little or no harm. I say no
    more, not knowing of any thing more remarkable. I am sorry that
    other Places were such great Sufferers, and I pray God avert the
    like Judgments for the future. I am

                      _Your real Friend to serve you_,
      _Orby_, Dec. 18. 1703.        Hen. Marshal.


    _SIR_,

    I have no particular Relation to make to you of any Deliverance in
    the late Storm, more than was common with me to all the rest that
    were in it: but having, to divert melancholly Thoughts while it
    lasted, turn'd into Verse the CXLVIII Psalm to the 9th, and
    afterwards all the Psalm; I give you leave to publish it with the
    rest of those Memoirs on that Occasion you are preparing for the
    Press.

      SIR, _Your_, &c.
            Henry Squier.

I. Verse 1, 2

    _Hallelujah: From Heav'n
      The tuneful Praise begin;
    Let Praise to God be giv'n
        Beyond the Starry Scene:
        Ye Angels sing
          His joyful Praise;
          Your Voices raise
        Ye swift of Wing._

II. 3, 4

    _Praise him, thou radiant Sun,
      The Spring of all thy Light;
    Praise him thou changing Moon,
      And all the Stars of Night:_
    _Ye Heav'ns declare
          His glorious Fame;
          And waves that swim
        Above the Sphere._

III. 5, 6

    _Let all his Praises sing,
      His Goodness and his Power,
    For at his Call they spring,
      And by his Grace endure;
        That joins 'em fast,
          The Chain is fram'd,
          Their Bounds are nam'd,
        And never past._

IV. 7, 8

    _Thou Earth his Praise proclaim,
      Devouring Gulfs and Deeps;
    Ye Fires, and fire-like Flame,
      That o'er the Meadows sweeps;
        Thou rattling Hail,
          And flaky Snow,
          And Winds that blow
        To do his Will._

V. 9, 10

    _Ye Prodigies of Earth,
      And Hills of lesser size,
    Cedars of nobler Birth,
      And all ye fruitful Trees;
        His Praises show
          All things that move,
          That fly above,
        Or creep below._

VI. 11, 12

    _Monarchs, and ye their Praise,
      The num'rous Multitude;
    Ye Judges, Triumphs raise;
      And all of nobler Blood:
        Of ev'ry kind,
          And ev'ry Age,
          Your Hearts engage,
        In Praises join'd._

VII. 13, 14

    _Let all his glorious Name
      Unite to celebrate;
    Above the Heaven's his Fame;
      His Fame that's only great:
        His Peoples Stay
          And Praise is He,
          And e're will be:
        Hallelujah._

The two following Letters, coming from Persons in as great Danger as any
could be, are plac'd here, as proper to be call'd Deliverances of the
greatest and strangest kind.

_From on board a Ship blown out of the_ Downs _to_ Norway.

    _SIR_,

    I cannot but write to you of the Particulars of our sad and terrible
    Voyage to this Place. You know we were, by my last, riding safe in
    the _Downs_, waiting a fair Wind, to make the best of our way to
    _Portsmouth_, and there to expect the _Lisbon_ Convoy.

    We had had two terrible Storms, one on the _Friday_ before, and one
    on _Thursday_; the one the 18th, the other the 25th of _November_:
    In the last I expected we shou'd have founder'd at an Anchor; for
    our Ground Tackle being new and very good held us fast, but the Sea
    broke upon us so heavy and quick, that we were in danger two or
    three times of Foundring as we rode but, as it pleas'd God we rid it
    out, we began to think all was over, and the Bitterness of Death was
    past.

    There was a great Fleet with us in the _Downs_, and several of them
    were driven from their Anchors, and made the best of their way out
    to Sea for fear of going on shore upon the _Goodwin_. the Grand
    Fleet was just come in from the _Streights_, under Sir _Cloudsly
    Shovel_; and the Great Ships being design'd for the River, lay to
    Leeward: Most of the Ships that went out in the Night appear'd in
    the Morning; and I think there was none known to be lost, but one
    _Dutch_ Vessel upon the _Goodwin_.

    But the next Day, being _Friday_, in the Evening, it began to gather
    to Windward; and as it had blown very hard all Day, at Night the
    Wind freshen'd, and we all expected a stormy Night. We saw the Men
    of War struck their Top-masts, and rode with two Cables an-end: so
    we made all as _snug_ as we could, and prepar'd for the worst.

    In this condition we rid it out till about 12 a-clock; when, the
    Fury of the Wind encreasing, we began to see Destruction before us:
    the Objects were very dreadful on every side; and tho' it was very
    dark, we had Light enough to see our own Danger, and the Danger of
    those near us. About One-a-clock the Ships began to drive, and we
    saw several come by us without a Mast standing, and in the utmost
    Distress.

    By Two a-clock we could hear Guns firing in several Parts of this
    Road, as Signals of Distress; and tho' the Noise was very great with
    the Sea and Wind, yet we could distinguish plainly, in some short
    Intervals, the Cries of poor Souls in Extremities.

    By Four-a-clock we miss'd the _Mary_ and the _Northumberland_, who
    rid not far from us, and found they were driven from their Anchors;
    but what became of them, God knows: and soon after a large Man of
    War came driving down upon us, all her Masts gone, and in a dreadful
    Condition. We were in the utmost Despair at this sight, for we saw
    no avoiding her coming thwart _our Haiser_: she drove at last so
    near us, that I was just gowing to order the Mate to cut away, when
    it pleas'd God the Ship sheer'd contrary to our Expectation to
    Windward, and the Man of War, which we found to be the _Sterling
    Castle_, drove clear off us, not two Ships Lengths to Leeward.

    It was a Sight full of terrible Particulars, to see a Ship of Eighty
    Guns and about Six Hundred Men in that dismal Case; she had cut away
    all her Masts, the Men were all in the Confusions of Death and
    Despair; she had neither Anchor, nor Cable, nor Boat to help her;
    the Sea breaking over her in a terrible Manner, that sometimes she
    seem'd all under Water; and they knew, as well as we that saw her,
    that they drove by the Tempest directly for the _Goodwin_, where
    they could expect nothing but Destruction: The Cries of the Men, and
    the firing their Guns, One by One, every Half Minute for Help,
    terrified us in such a Manner, that I think we were half dead with
    the Horror of it.

    All this while we rid with two Anchors a-head, and in great
    Distress: To fire Guns for Help, I saw was to no Purpose, for if any
    Help was to be had, there were so many other Objects for it, that we
    could not expect it, and the Storm still encreasing.

    Two Ships, a-head of us, had rid it out till now, which was towards
    Five in the Morning, when they both drove from their Anchors, and
    one of them coming foul of a small _Pink_, they both sunk together;
    the other drove by us, and having one Mast standing, I think it was
    her Main-Mast, she attempted to spread a little Peak of her Sail,
    and so stood away before it; I suppose she went away to Sea.

    At this time, the Raging of the Sea was so violent, and the Tempest
    doubled its Fury in such a Manner, that my Mate told me, we had
    better go away to Sea, for 'twould be impossible to ride it out; I
    was not of his Opinion, but was for cutting my Masts by the Board,
    which at last we did, and parted with them with as little Damage as
    could be expected, and we thought she rid easier for it by a great
    deal; and I believe, had it blown two Hours longer, we should have
    rid it out, having two new Cables out, and our best Bower and Sheet
    Anchor down: But about Half an Hour after Five to Six, it blew, if
    it be possible to conceive it so, as hard again as it had done
    before, and first our best Bower Anchor came Home, the Mate, who
    felt it give way, cried out, we are all undone, for the Ship drove;
    I found it too true, and, upon as short a Consultation as the Time
    would admit, we concluded to put out to Sea before we were driven
    too far to Leeward, when it would be impossible to avoid the
    _Goodwin_.

    So we slipt our Sheet Cable, and sheering the Ship towards the
    Shore, got her Head about, and stood away afore it; Sail we had
    none, nor Mast standing: Our Mate had set up a Jury Missen but no
    Canvass could bear the Fury of the Wind, yet he fasten'd an old
    Tarpaulin so as that it did the Office of a Missen and kept us from
    driving too fast to Leeward.

    In this Condition we drove out of the _Downs_, and past so near the
    _Goodwin_, that we could see several great Ships fast a ground, and
    beating to Pieces. We drove in this desperate Condition till
    Day-break, without any Abatement of the Storm, and our Men heartless
    and dispirited, tir'd with the Service of the Night, and every
    Minute expecting Death.

    About 8 a Clock, my Mate told me, he perceiv'd the Wind to abate;
    but it blew still such a Storm, that if we had not had a very tite
    Ship, she must have founder'd, as we were now farther off at Sea,
    and by my Guess might be in the mid Way between _Harwich_ and the
    _Brill_, the Sea we found run longer, and did not break so quick
    upon us as before, but it ran exceeding high, and we having no Sail
    to keep us to rights, we lay wallowing in the Trough of the Sea in a
    miserable Condition: We saw several Ships in the same Condition with
    our selves, but could neither help them, nor they us; and one we saw
    founder before our Eyes, and all the People perish'd.

    Another dismal Object we met with, which was an open Boat full of
    Men, who, as we may suppose, had lost their Ship; any Man may
    suppose, what Condition a Boat must be in, if we were in so bad a
    Case in a good Ship: we were soon tost out of their Sight, and what
    became of them any one may guess; if they had been within Cables
    Length of us we could not have help'd them.

    About Two a Clock in the Afternoon, the Wind encreased again, and we
    made no doubt it would prove as bad a Night as before; but that Gust
    held not above Half an Hour.

    All Night it blew excessive hard, and the next Day, which was
    Sabbath Day, about Eleven a Clock it abated, but still blew hard:
    about three it blew something moderately, compar'd with the former;
    and we got up a Jury Main-Mast, and rigg'd it as well as we could,
    and with a Main Sail lower'd almost to the Deck, stood at a great
    Rate afore it all Night and the next Day, and on _Tuesday_ Morning
    we saw Land, but could not tell where it was; but being not in a
    Condition to keep the Sea, we run in, and made Signals of Distress;
    some Pilots came off to us, by whom we were inform'd we had reached
    the Coast of _Norway_, and having neither Anchor nor Cable on board
    capable to ride the Ship, a _Norweigian_ Pilot came on board, and
    brought us into a Creek where we had smooth Water, and lay by till
    we got Help, Cables, and Anchors, by which means we are safe in
    Place.

      _Your Humble Servant_,
                      J. Adams.

_From on board the_ John and Mary, _riding in_ Yarmouth _Roads during
the great Storm, but now in the River of_ Thames.

    _SIR_,

    Hearing of your good Design of preserving the Memory of the late
    Dreadful Storm for the Benefit of Posterity, I cannot let you want
    the Particulars as happen'd to us on board our Ship.

    We came over the Bar of _Tinmouth_ about the ---- having had
    terrible blowing Weather for almost a Week, insomuch that we were
    twice driven back almost the Length of _Newcastle_, with much
    Difficulty and Danger we got well over that, and made the
    _High-land_ about _Cromer_ on the North-side of _Norfolk_; here it
    blew so hard the _Wednesday_ Night before, that we could not keep
    the Sea, nor fetch the Roads of _Yarmouth_; but as the Coast of
    _Norfolk_ was a Weather-shore, we hall'd as close _Cromer_ as we
    durst lie, the Shore there being very flat; here we rode _Wednesday_
    and _Thursday_, the 24th and 25th of _November_.

    We could not reckon our selves safe here, for as this is the most
    dangerous Place between _London_ and _Newcastle_, and has been
    particularly fatal to our Colliers, so we were very uneasy; I
    considered that when such Tempestuous Weather happen'd, as this
    seem'd to threaten, nothing is more frequent than for the Wind to
    shift Points; and if it should have blown half the Wind from the
    South East, as now blew from the South West, we must have gone
    a-shore there, and been all lost for being embayed; there we should
    have had no putting out to Sea, nor staying there.

    This Consideration made me resolve to be gon, and thinking on
    _Friday_ Morning the Wind slacken'd a little, I weigh'd and stood
    away for _Yarmouth_ Roads; and with great Boating and Labour got
    into the Roads about One in the Afternoon, being a little after
    Flood, we found a very great Fleet in the Roads; there was above
    Three Hundred Sail of Colliers, not reckoning above Thirty Sail
    which I left behind me, that rode it out thereabouts, and there was
    a great Fleet just come from _Russia_, under the Convoy of the
    _Reserve_ Frigate, and Two other Men of War; and about a Hundred
    Sail of Coasters, _Hull_-Men, and such small Craft.

    We had not got to an Anchor, moor'd, and set all to Rights, but I
    found the Wind freshen'd, the Clouds gather'd, and all look'd very
    black to Windward; and my Mate told me, he wish'd he had staid where
    we were, for he would warrant it we had a blowing Night of it.

    We did what we could to prepare for it, struck our Top-mast, and
    slung our Yards, made all tite and fast upon Deck; the Night prov'd
    very dark, and the Wind blew a Storm about Eight a Clock, and held
    till Ten, when we thought it abated a little, but at Eleven it
    freshen'd again, and blew very hard; we rid it out very well till
    Twelve, when we veer'd out more Cable, and in about Half an Hour
    after, the Wind encreasing, let go our Sheet Anchor; by One a Clock
    it blew a dreadful Storm, and though our Anchors held very well, the
    Sea came over us in such a vast Quantity, that we was every Hour in
    Danger of Foundring: About Two a Clock the Sea fill'd our Boat as
    she lay upon the Deck, and we was glad to let her go over board for
    Fear of staving in our Decks: Our Mate would then have cut our Mast
    by the Board, but I was not willing, and told him, I thought we had
    better slip our Cables, and go out to Sea, he argued she was a deep
    Ship, and would not live in the Sea, and was very eager for cutting
    away the Mast; but I was loth to part with my Mast, and could not
    tell where to run for Shelter if I lost them.

    About Three a Clock abundance of Ships drove away, and came by us;
    some with all their Masts gone, and foul of one another; in a sad
    Condition my Men said they saw Two founder'd together, but I was in
    the Cabin, and cannot say I saw it. I saw a _Russia_ Ship come foul
    of a Collier, and both drove away together out of our Sight, but I
    am told since the _Russia_ Man sunk by her Side.

    In this Condition we rid till about Three a Clock, the _Russia_
    Ships which lay a-head of me, and the Men of War, who lay a-head of
    them, fir'd their Guns for Help, but 'twas in vain to expect it; the
    Sea went too high for any Boat to live. About Five, the Wind blew at
    that prodigious Rate, that there was no Possibility of riding it
    out, and all the Ships in the Road seem'd to us to drive: Yet still
    our Anchors held it, and I began to think we should ride it out
    there, or founder; when a Ship's long Boat came driving against us,
    and gave such a Shock on the Bow that I thought it must have been a
    Ship come foul of us, and expected to sink all at once; our Men said
    there was some people in the Boat, but as the Sea went so high no
    Man dust stand upon the Fore-castle, so no Body could be sure of it;
    the Boat stav'd to pieces with the Blow, and went away, some on One
    Side of us and some on the other; but whether our Cable receiv'd any
    Damage by it or not we cannot tell, but our Sheet Cable gave Way
    immediately, and as the other was not able to hold us alone, we
    immediately drove; we had then no more to do, but to put afore the
    Wind, which we did: it pleased God by this Time the Tide of Ebb was
    begun, which something abated the Height of the Sea, but still it
    went exceeding high; we saw a great many Ships in the same Condition
    with our selves, and expecting every Moment to sink in the Sea. In
    this Extremity we drove till Daylight when we found the Wind abated,
    and we stood in for the Shore, and coming under the Lee of the
    _Cliff_ near _Scarbro_, we got so much Shelter, as that our small
    Bower Anchors would ride us.

    I can give you no Account but this; but sure such a Tempest never
    was in the World. They say here, that of Eighty Sail in _Grimsby_
    Road, they can hear of but Sixteen; yet the rest are all blown away,
    Here is about Twelve or Fourteen Sail of Ships come in to this
    Place, and more are standing in for the Shore.

      _Yours_, &c.

Abundance of other strange Deliverances have been related, but with so
small Authority as we dare not convey them into the World under the same
Character with the rest; and have therefore chose to omit them.




_The Conclusion_


The Editor of this Book has labour'd under some Difficulties in this
Account: and one of the chief has been, how to avoid too many
Particulars, the Crowds of Relations which he has been oblig'd to lay by
to bring the Story into a Compass tolerable to the Reader.

And tho' some of the Letters inserted are written in a homely Stile, and
exprest after the Country Fashion from whence they came, the Author
chose to make them speak their own Language, rather than by dressing
them in other Words make the Authors forget they were their own.

We receiv'd a Letter, very particular, relating to the Bishop of _Bath_
and _Wells_, and reflecting upon his Lordship for some Words he spoke,
_That he had rather have his Brains knock'd out, than_ &c. relating to
his Inferiour Clergy. The Gentleman takes the Disaster for a Judgment of
God on him: But as in his Letter the Person owns himself the Bishop's
Enemy, fills his Letter with some Reflexions indecent, at least for us:
and at last, tho' he dates from _Somerton_, yet baulks setting his Name
to his Letter: for these Reasons we could not satisfie to record the
Matter, and leave a Charge on the Name of that unfortunate Gentleman,
which, he being dead, could not answer, and we alive could not prove.
And on these Accounts hope the Reverend Gentleman who sent the Letter
will excuse Us.

Also we have omitted, tho' our List of Particulars promis'd such a
thing, An Account of some unthinking Wretches, who pass'd over this
dreadful Judgment with Banter, Scoffing, and Contempt. 'Tis a Subject
ungrateful to recite, and full of Horror to read; and we had much rather
cover such Actions with a general Blank in Charity to the Offenders,
and in hopes of their Amendment.

One unhappy Accident I cannot omit, and which is brought us from good
Hands, and happen'd in a Ship homeward bound from the _West-Indies_. The
Ship was in the utmost Danger of Foundring; and when the Master saw all,
as he thought, lost, his Masts gone, the Ship leaky, and expecting her
every moment to sink under him, fill'd with Despair, he calls to him the
Surgeon of the Ship, and by a fatal Contract, as soon made as hastily
executed, they resolv'd to prevent the Death they fear'd by one more
certain; and going into the Cabbin, they both shot themselves with their
Pistols. It pleas'd God the Ship recover'd the Distress, was driven safe
into ---- and the Captain just liv'd to see the desperate Course he took
might have been spar'd; the Surgeon died immediately.

There are several very remarkable Cases come to our Hands since the
finishing this Book, and several have been promis'd which are not come
in; and the Book having been so long promis'd, and so earnestly desir'd
by several Gentlemen that have already assisted that way, the
Undertakers could not prevail with themselves to delay it any longer.


_FINIS._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Storm, by Daniel Defoe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORM ***

***** This file should be named 42234-0.txt or 42234-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/2/3/42234/

Produced by Steven Gibbs, Eleni Christofaki and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

