Project Gutenberg's Pennsylvania Dutch Rip Van Winkle, by Edward H. Rauch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Pennsylvania Dutch Rip Van Winkle
       A romantic drama in two acts

Author: Edward H. Rauch

Release Date: November 4, 2017 [EBook #55888]

Language: Pennsylvania Dutch

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PENNSYLVANIA DUTCH RIP VAN WINKLE ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net










                           PENNSYLVANIA DUTCH
                             RIP VAN WINKLE

                      A ROMANTIC DRAMA IN TWO ACTS

             TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL, WITH VARIATIONS.

                             BY E. H. RAUCH
                        (“PIT SCHWEFFELBRENNER.”)

                            MAUCH CHUNK, PA.:
                         E. H. RAUCH, PUBLISHER,
                    MAUCH CHUNK DEMOCRAT STEAM PRINT.
                                  1883.

        Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1883 by
                              E. H. RAUCH,
     in the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington, D. C.




CAST OF CHARACTERS.--[RIP VAN WINKLE.]


ACT I.--1763.

    RIP VAN WINKLE          A DUTCHMAN
    KNICKERBOCKER           A SCHOOLMASTER
    DERRICK VAN SLAUS       THE SQUIRE
    HERMAN VAN SLAUS        HIS SON
    NICHOLAS VEDDER         FRIEND TO RIP
    CLAUSIN                 FRIEND TO RIP
    RORY VAN CLUMP          A LANDLORD
    GUSTAFFE                A YOUNG MAN
    DAME VAN WINKLE         RIP’S WIFE
    ALICE                   RIP’S SISTER
    LORRENNA                RIP’S DAUGHTER
    SWAGGRINO,            }
    GAUDERKIN,            } SPIRITS OF THE BLUE MOUNTAIN
    ICKEN,                }


ACT II.--After a lapse of twenty years supposed to occur between the
First and Second Acts.

    RIP VAN WINKLE          THE DREAMER
    HERMAN VAN SLAUS
    SETH SLOUGH
    KNICKERBOCKER
    THE JUDGE
    GUSTAFFE
    RIP VAN WINKLE, JR.
    FIRST VILLAGER
    SECOND VILLAGER
    ALICE KNICKERBOCKER
    LORRENNA




COSTUME.--[RIP VAN WINKLE.]


    RIP.--_First dress_:--A deer skin coat and belt, full brown
    breeches, deer skin gaiters, cap. _Second dress_:--Same, but much
    worn and ragged.

    KNICKERBOCKER--_First dress_:--Brown square cut coat, vest
    and breeches, shoes and buckles. _Second dress_:--Black coat,
    breeches, hose, &c.

    DERRICK VAN SLAUS--Square cut coat, full breeches, black silk
    hose, shoes and buckles--_powder_.

    HERMAN--_First dress_:--Ibid. _Second dress_:--Black frock coat,
    tight pants, boots and tassels.

    VEDDER  }
    CLAUSIN } Dark square cut coats, vests, breeches, &c.
    RORY    }

    GUSTAFFE--Blue jacket, white pants, shoes.

    SETH SLOUGH--Gray coat, striped vest, large gray pants.

    JUDGE--Full suit of black.

    YOUNG RIP--A dress similar to Rip’s first dress.

    DAME--Short gown and quilted petticoat, cap.

    ALICE--_First dress_:--Bodice, with half skirt, figured
    petticoat. _Second dress_:--Brown satin bodice and skirt, &c.

    LORRENNA, Act I--A child.

    LORRENNA, Act II--White muslin dress, black ribbon belt, &c.


STAGE DIRECTIONS.

L. _Means First Entrance, Left._ R. _First Entrance, Right._ S. E. L.
_Second Entrance, Left._ S. E. R. _Second Entrance, Right._ U. E. L.
_Upper Entrance, Left._ U. E. R. _Upper Entrance, Right._ C. _Center._
L. C. _Left Centre._ R. C. _Right of Centre._ T. E. L. _Third Entrance,
Left._ T. E. R. _Third Entrance Right._ C. D. _Centre Door._ D. R. _Door
Right._ D. L. _Door Left._ U. D. L. _Upper Door, Left._ U. D. R. _Upper
Door, Right._

⁂ The reader is supposed to be on the Stage, facing the Audience.




RIP VAN WINKLE




ACT I.


SCENE I--_A Village.--House, L. H. 3 E., with a sign of “GEORGE
III.”--Two or three tables, C. L. and R.--Villagers discovered,
smoking.--VEDDER, R., KNICKERBOCKER, L. C., RORY, L., CLAUSIN at tea
table.--Chorus at rising of curtain._

    CHORUS.

    In our native land, where flows the Rhine,
      In infancy we culled the vine:
    Although we toiled with patient care.

    SOLO.

    Till tempting waves, with anxious toil,
      We landed on Columbia’s soil;
    Now plenty, all our cares repay,
      So laugh and dance the hours away.

    CHORUS.

    Now plenty all our cares repay,
      So laugh and dance the hours away;
    Ha, ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha!
      So laugh and dance the hours away.

_Vedd._ Sawg, du, Clausin, we’d uf ’m waig warsht, husht ebbas fun unserm
freind Rip Van Winkle g’sana? Wo ebbas os we olter whiskey tzu hawa is
bin ich goot derfore os ar sure is um der waig tzu si--olsfort im dorsht!

_Knick._ Du besser gebsht aucht wass du sawgsht. Ennicher mon os ’m
’a goota glaws whiskey ous ’m waig gait is ’n norr. Sell is my plainy
Deitshe mainung. Awer ich sawg der, mauch kæ fun fum Rip, for ich
exshpect amohl ains fun denna dawg mich aw tzu shleesa on si fomelia, un
ich nem satisfaction ous ennich ame os ’n insult.

_Vedd._ So so. Demnoch husht di mind uf gamaucht ’m Rip si shaney
shweshter tzu hira?

_Knick._ Sell is exactly wass ich im sin hob tzu du. Der Rip is ’s
agreed; de Alice is ’s agreed un ich bin ’s agreed.

_Clau._ Bisht awer aw now sure os du de Ripsy, ’m Rip is fraw, uf diner
side husht? Is se ’s aw agreed?

_Knick._ Sell is de ainsich bodderation. Denk yusht we se fun weaga meer
shwetzt. Se sawgt ich bin nix os ’n long bainich, slop-orrich, dobbich,
ouslendish’s creddoor!

_Rory._ Gook doh cooma se--de Alice un aw ’m Rip si duchter.

    _Music.--Enter ALICE, with LORRENNA, U. E. R. H._

_Alice._ Coom, du fowlenser, odder ’s gebt ’n rumpus derhame waun mer so
long bleiva. Wass wærd de olt fraw sawga?

_Lor._ Well, ’s is net my shoold, for du bisht ivver a dootzend mohl de
lane uf un ob g’luffa un husht for der shoolmaishter Knickerbocker ous
gogookt.

_Alice._ Du haltsht mer now ’s maul--’s is net wohr!

_Lor._ Well now--du waisht os ’d ’n gleichsht?

_Alice._ Un we waisht now sell?

_Lor._ Oh sell con mer sana un nemond brauch ’s ame sawga. Un ich wase aw
os ’d jealous bisht weaga eem.

    [_KNICKERBOCKER advances L. H._

_Alice._ Jealous, weaga eem! Nay, sell is net wohr--ich ferlong si weesht
g’sicht gor nimmy aw gooka.

_Knick._ Coom now--shwetz net sellerwaig--wann ich glawa date os du
mainsht wass du sawgsht don date ich mich grawd dode sheesa.

_Alice._ Oh, sell wær awer tzu orrick for wann ’d sell du date’sht don
glawb ich so g’wiss ich labe os di shpook mer ivverall noch lawfa date.

_Lor._ Un ich bin sure os du feel leever een selwer nemma date’sht os
yusht si shpook. Sawgsht net selwer so, Alice?

_Knick._ Sell is now ’n shmarts maidly! Awer Alice, du seeser hoonich,
suppose ich roof aw den owet--wann de olty leit ous ’m waig sin? Was
sawgsht?

_Alice._ Nay, net for de gons welt! Wann de olt fraw dich im house finna
date don insure ich os ’s widder amohl shtawb gevva date.

_Lor._ Awer Alice, waisht net os de mommy sheer olly owet nous gait tzu
era nochber, de olt Wigrimsy? Now wann du (to Knickerbocker) coomsht so
about ’m aucht uhr un shmeisht ’a wennich gravel wedder ’s fenshter, ei
don consht ferleicht de Alice sana.

_Knick._ Goot for dich--’s shmartsht maidle in der welt! Awer Alice, ich
hob now aw my mind uf gamaucht os ich gor nix mæ um de Ripsy geb, un ’s
naigsht mohl os ich se aw treff sawg ich era grawd rous os----

_Dame._ [_Without, R. U. E._] Alice! Alice! Shweffle un solpater! Awer
ich geb der ’s amohl wann ich dich ferwish!

    [_The Villagers exit, R. and L. H._]

_Knick._ Shpring, Alice, shpring!

    [_ALICE, LORRENNA and KNICKERBOCKER run to R._]

_Dame._ [_Without R._] Alice!

    [_ALICE, LORRENNA and KNICKERBOCKER exit hastily, L. H._]

_Rory._ By jinks, awer seller fraw era tzung runn’d os we ’n enda shwans.

_Vedd._ Un wann se yusht de sound fun era shtimm hara don du’n se derfu
shpringa os wann se ’n shpook ous ’m Blowa Barrick wær! Awer wo der
dihenker is don der Rip all de weil? [_RIP singing without, L. 2 E._]
Awer wann mer fum deifel shwetzt is ar aw olsfort um der waig.

    [_Enter RIP VAN WINKLE, L. 2 E. with gun, game bag, &c._]

_Rip._ Rip, Rip, wass is des for ’a bisness? Du bisht nix nootz, un sell
is ’n fact. Now bin ich ob g’shtart free don morya for nous in der Blowa
Barrick, un hob gadenkt ich kent ’n gooter sock ful hawsa un feggle mit
hame bringa, awer d’no is der olt Van Brunt, seller shail-awgich ding aw
cooma mit a wennich whiskey, un--well--’s is so--ich hob net goot refusa
kenna anes tzu nemma, un d’no hen mer evva noch amohl anes g’nooma, un
ivver a weil noch anes, un ich wase by chucks nimmy we uft--any how mer
hen maner os yusht so a pawr g’nooma. Un ivver a weil is der Van Brunt so
’a wennich how-cum-you-so warra un d’no hut ar sich onna g’laig’d un is
ei g’shlofa, un ich bin grawd nous in der barrick un hob feggle g’sana
maner os dri doubled uf amohl. Awer--ich wase net we’s coom’d os ich kæ
dam fuggle g’shussa hob. Un now hob ich ob g’shwora. Ich drink kæ whiskey
mæ--kæ druppa so long os ich labe--un wann ebber mich froke’d for drinka
don sawg ich ’m [_VEDDER comes down, R. and offers cup to him._]

_Rip._ Nay ich hob uf my aid g’shwora os nix mæ drink.

_Vedd._ Awer now yusht des ea mohl--ea droonk shod nemond nix.

_Rip._ Nay--ich hob ob g’shwora un ich du’s net.

_Vedd._ Sei mer doch now net so coryose--coom, nems--yusht anes.

_Rip._ [_Hesitating, takes the jug._] Well don, des tzailt now net--awer
mind--yusht des ea mohl, weil ich ob g’shwora hob. Un now, doh gaits, tzu
’m deifel un de fomelia un aw g’sundheit un longs lava. [_Drinks._]

_Vedd._ Un now, Rip, sawg mer amohl, wo der bettle warsht der gons dawg?
’S war uns sheer bong de shpooks im barrick hetta dich g’fonga.

_Rip._ Haw, haw; ha, ha--ich hob in all meim dawg un ’s lavas noch ne kæ
shpook g’sana--awer wass se shpirits hasa os se in de buttla ni du’n, mit
sella bin ich ordlich goot bakannt.

_Vedd._ Un selly du’n dich for common aw ols um shmeisa--net so?

_Rip._ Beim dihenker, sell is a fact--sell is so, ha, ha.

_Vedd._ Awer Rip--sawg now, wo warsht, anyhow?

_Rip._ Ei ich war on der arwet--hob hord g’shafft--war orrick bissy, for,
du waisht, ich luss mer ne kæ chance dorrich de finger shlippa.

_Rory._ [_Down L._] Awer di game sock is lare--we commt’s?

_Rip._ Coom, now, manch mer now kæ shpass fun meim sock doh.

_Vedd._ Well Rip--ich will der now sawga wass mer du’n--mer hucka uns doh
onna un shmoka de peifa un nemma ’a wennich ous der buttle doh--

_Rip._ Nay--nay, ich du’s net. Ich hob uf my aid g’shwora os ich gor nix
mæ drink--un os ich nix du os my bisness mannetsha.

_Vedd._ Du denksht ferleicht os du den waig di fraw mannetsha connsht?

_Rip._ My fraw mannetsha! Ei denksht don ich con nuf fleega on der mond
ona fliggle? Denksht ich con der gons Blow Barrick uf ea load mit ’m
shoob-korrich weck fawra, odder uf a pawr shtelsa ivver de sæ bawda? Wann
ich amohl all sell du con, don con ich ferleicht aw my fraw mannetsha.
[_All laugh._]

_Rory._ Coom now Rip--nem anes, yusht ea glaws.

_Rip._ Nay, kæ druppa--ferflomt si wann ich now my aid ferbrech.

_Vedd._ Well, don, wann ’d net wid, ei don du ona.

    [_All go to the table but RIP._

_Rip._ Desmohl hob gaprooft os ich mich selwer regulata con--os ich net
back gæ up my aid os ich g’shwora hob, und now, sell, denk ich, entitled
mich tzu eme droonk anyhow.

    [_Goes to the table._

_Omnes._ Ha, ha, ha!

_Rory._ Doh, Rip, doh is ’n glaws, un ich insures os ’s aw ’s recht
shtuft is.

    [_Gives him a glass._

_Rip._ Awer now mind--dar droonk doh tzailt now net, un doh gaits tzum
deifel und de fomelia tzu ’m deifel un aw g’sundheit un longs lava for
eich all! Immer un eawich, awer wass sawgt now my olty wann ich hame coom?

_Vedd. & Rory._ Ha, ha, ha! Coom now, sing amohl anes.

_Rip._ Well, doh gaits don--a warning tzu leit os noch leddich sin.

SONG.--RIP.

    List, my friends, to caution’s voice,
      Ere de marriage knot you tie;
    It is the devil, mit shkrews to shplice,
      Dat nobody can deny, deny,
        Dat nobody can deny.

            _Chorus._--Dat nobody can deny, &c.

    When a wife to rule once wishes,
      Mit poor spouse ’tis all my eye,
    I’m d----d if she don’t wear de breeches,
      Dat nobody can deny, deny,
        Dat nobody can deny.

            _Chorus._--Dat nobody can deny, &c.

    Yet dere is a charm about dem,
      Do dere voices are so high
    We can’t do mit ’em. (_Pause._
      Nor we can’t do mit out em,
        Dat nobody can deny, deny,
          Dat nobody can deny.

            _Chorus._--Dat nobody can deny, &c.

_Dame._ [_without R. I. E._] Rip! Rip! Wann ich dich now ferwish don
ferluss dich druf os ’d ’s aw fongsht!

_Rip._ Gott in himmel! Sell is my olty!

_Dame._ (_without_) Rip! Du fowlenser, Rip!

_Rip._ [_Gets under the table with bottle._] Look out, boova--de will-colz
coom’d!

    MUSIC.--_VEDDER, RORY and CLAUSIN, at table.--Enter DAME, with
    stick. R. U. E._

_Dame._ Wo der dihenker is my nix-nootzicha lodle fum a mon? Shweffle un
solpater! Hurrich! Ich hare si shtimm--der hen’d ’n arryats fershteckled.
Der set eich shemma, ’n mon den waig fun siner fraw un fomelia weck tzu
nemma! Der d’ut all uf mich imposa weil der wist os ich goot g’noddoord
bin--so ich ne net base wær. [_They laugh._] Awer mind now, de shwarnoat
will ich krega wann ich eich net uf ’m onner side fum maul laucha mauch!

    [_Music--Chases them round the table--they exit L. and R. DAME
    upsets table and discovers RIP._

_Dame._ Oh du shlechter, meaner loadle du! Now, wass husht tzu sawga, du
weshty drecksow?

_Rip._ Doh gaits now--all tzum deifel--du un de fomelia un g’sundheit for
se all!

_Dame._ [_Pulling him down the stage by the ear._] Ich bin net base. Ich
bin keel, un goot g’noddoor’d. Awer so we du mich treatsht con ich net
shtanda. Un now, du loadle, gaisht mer grawd hame. Awer sawg mer now de
wohret--was husht heit gadu der gons dawg?

_Rip._ Wass hob ich gadu? Ei ich hob ’m Van Brunt g’hulfa--hob orrick
free den morya aw g’fonga. ’S arsht ding os ich g’sana hob den morya war
’n haws, im feld, un ar war om graws fressa.

_Dame._ ’N haws--well, ’n haws, sell is wass ich gleich--’n haws for
middawg essa.

_Rip._ Sell is now goot--’n haws--denksht net?

_Dame._ Well, awer wo husht der haws?

_Rip._ Ward now yusht--hob gadoold--ich will der ’s sawga. ’S war evva ’n
haws, du waisht, drous in feld, un ar hut graws g’fressa----

_Dame._ Well, well--awer der haws--wo husht ’n?

_Rip._ Coom now, geb mer ’n chance for ’s sawga. Well, ’s war ’n haws--ar
war drous un feld, un ar hut graws g’fressa----

_Dame._ Well----

_Rip._ Un ich d’no uf mit der flint----

_Dame._ Yaw, un----

_Rip._ Un ich hob shorf gatzeelt on ’n un--

_Dame._ Well--

_Rip._ Un hob der drigger gatzoga un--

_Dame._ Un d’no, of course, is der haws gadropt--

_Rip._ Well, net exactly--de flint is lose gonga--awer der haws aw.
Cheemeny fires awer seller haws hetsht sana sella shpringa!

_Dame._ Ei don husht--

_Rip._ Domt si, ’s is wohr--

_Dame._ Un husht gor nix soonsht g’shussa?

_Rip._ Net desmohl--awer ’s naigsht mohl--ich hob my my flint g’lawda un
uf g’fixed, un nuf ons klæ demly dort im feld, un wass denksht now os ich
dort g’sana hob?

_Dame._ Ei, wildy enda--besure.

_Rip._ Yaw, maner os fooftzich--so grose waura se os gens, un, well, ich
uf mit der flint--

_Dame._ Un ich aw (_raising a stick_) wann du’s desmohl ferfailsh’t.

_Rip._ Bang!

_Dame._ Un we feel sin gabortzel’d?

_Rip._ Ainy.

_Dame._ Net maner os aney ous fooftzich?

_Rip._ Yaw, ordlich feel maner os yusht ea end.

_Dame._ Well don, husht doch maner os aney g’shussa?

_Rip._ Yaw--feel maner os ea end, ’s war ordlich grosses game--fact is,
’s war’n grosser shwartzer bull os ich g’shussa hob.

_Dame._ Wass--now--

_Rip._ Domt si wann ’s net wohr is! Un sell hetsht sana sella. Gott im
Himmel, wass hut seller bull awer gabroomt, un si shwans g’shlenkert, un
g’shneesd un g’shnorrixd! Un der bull is d’no aw so a wennich for mich
gatraveled un ich hob my beshts gadu os ar so ’n ordlich goots shtick
hinner mer bleibt. D’no bin ich on der fence aw galand, un yusht we ich
net gons ivver der fence war is ’m bull si horn a wennich in contact
cooma mit ’m sitz fun meina hussa--so fun hinna bei, du waisht. Un d’no,
Gott im Himmel, ich bin nuf tzu’s gonga--ich wase net we hoch, anyhow we
ich widder om rooner tzu’s cooma war bin ich aw galand im a grossa bawm
un dort war ich for a goot weil fesht g’shtucka, un, ’a, du waisht evva
we ’s ame gait wann so ’n shwartzer bull for ame traveled fun hinna by,
un, du--du, du, du waisht evva, ’a--

_Dame._ Un d’no hisht ei g’shlofa?

_Rip._ Sell is so--by chucks awer du consht goot gessa--glawb beim bettle
du consht hexa!

_Dame._ [_Catching him by the ear._] Now, hame--du meaner, fowler loafer
du [_beating him._]

_Rip._ Awer, my gooty un leevy fraw----

_Dame._ Hame gaisht mer now grawd. (_Beating him._)

_Rip._ Nay, now, nay----

_Dame._ Hame, hame mit der, hame, (_beating him_.)

_Rip._ Gott im Himmel---- (_DAME beating him off, S. H. 1. R._)


SCENE II.--_A Plain Chamber in First Grooves._

    _Enter DERRIC VAN SLAUS, L. H._

_Derr._ Wann mer des ding now net glickt don bin ich g’ruineert. So
gaits ame wann mer ’n sohn hut os tzu feel sowft! Ich hob ’m ols g’hulfa
mit geld bis ich selwer tzu sawga ous g’shpeelt war, un ich hob so gor
geld g’used os net my eagas war, un wann ich sell net tzurick con du on
si plotz, don bin ich hinna wedder. ’S is wohr, my sohn hut ’n gooty
larnung, un ar is ’n lawyer, un ar hut ’n office in Nei Yorrick, un wann
ar yusht aucht gebt un net tzu feel sowft, ei don con om end noch olles
recht cooma.

_Herman._ [_Without L. H._] My dawdy, sawgsht, is arryats doh um der waig?

_Derr._ Horrich! Sell is ’n--ich ken ’n on der shtimm! Now, wass der
bettle bringt ’n don so unferhuft doh har? Ich farrich ’s is ebbas letz!

    _Enter HERMAN, L. H._

_Derr._ Ei Herman, was bringt dich don widder doh tzurick? Husht now my
gooter roat widder net g’nooma?

_Herm._ Ich blame dich net os du unruich bisht. Awer eb os du groomelsht
derweiga horrich wass ich tzu sawga hob. Ich bin desmohl uf bisness
ous--bisness os uns all tzwæ aw gait.

_Derr._ Oh, of course, du husht widder ’n waig ous g’shtuddied for noch
manner geld shpenda----

_Herm._ Nay, sell is net so--ich bin uf nix-a-so ous. Awer ich hob ’n
plan for uns ous der noat helfa.

_Derr._ Well, don, sawg mer amohl di plan--wass is ’s?

_Herm._ Ich will der ’s sawga, Du kennsht der Rip Van Winkle--net so?

_Derr._ Of course ken ich ’n. Olly leit kenna een un wissa exactly wass
ar is--’n nix-nootzicher loodle. Awer ea ding is wohr--ar is ’n olter
ding os gooter shpunk hut, for ar hut amohl di lava g’safed we’d in a
meel dom g’falla bisht--sellamohls wærsht sure fersuffa wann ’s net for
een g’west wær--

_Herm._ Un ar hut ’n duchter os arsht sivva yohr olt is, un my plan os
ich hob is now weaga era--

_Derr._ Well, go ahead. Geb mer now amohl di plan.

_Herm._ Ei, du waisht, ich hob my Nei Yorricker office in der same shtoob
mit ’m ’a onnera lawyer, un doh for a pawr dawg hut seller lawyer ’n
willa g’shrivva for sellam same klæ sivva yairich maidly si olty aunt.
Se is down up der olt Rip Van Winkle, un se hut der willa so g’fixed os
’s maidly olles grickt--der olt aunt era gons fermaiga. Un se is orrick
reich, un wann now sell maidly yusht lava bleibt don gebt se de reichsht
fraw im gonsa County.

_Derr._ Well, suppose sell is all so, wass con sell uns botta?

_Herm._ Ferleicht ordlich feel--suppose ich mauch mich now ’a wennich
aw beim Rip un secure si nawma tzu ’m ’a shreivas os ’s maidle mich
hira mus wann se uf eld coomd, un don, uf selly arbshaft con ich d’no ’n
ordlich grossy sum geld raisa uf forna nous. Un now, dawdy, wass denksht
fum plan?

_Derr._ Well now, ich wase net--’s kent ferleicht gadu wærra. Anyhow,
der Rip is now widder si rent shuldich, un des is de besht tzeit for
amohl mit ’m tzu shwetza derwaga un ous finna eb ar ’s agreea date so ’n
shreivas tzu signa--of course, mer mist a wennich ebbas du for ’n.

_Herm._ Un ’s bobbeer is shun ready--’s fail’d nix os yusht ’m Rip si
nawma. [_Presents the paper._]

_Derr._ Well, don, gæ ich aw grawd amohl tzu’m un proweer wass ich du con
mit ’m.

    [_Exit R. H._

_Herm._ [_Solus._] Des is now der waig for bisness du. My dawdy is anyhow
g’satisfied os ich aw wase we mer so dinga mannetsh’d. Of course, ’n
lawyer darraf sich net feel boddera mit seim g’wissa. Wann des ding now
recht shafft ei don bin ich ordlich goot ob g’fixd.


SCENE III.--_RIP’S Cottage,--Door, L. 2 E.--Window in flat.--A closet in
flat, with dishes, shelves, &c.--Clothes basket, with clothes.--Table,
chairs, arm chair, with cloak over it.--Broom on stage._

    _KNICKERBOCKER enters cautiously, D. 2 E. D._

_Knick._ Desmohl awer run ich ’n grosser risk--feel os wann ich umringt
wær mit wilty creddoora. Awer, so weit gookts os wann olles recht wær.
Wann yusht now de Alice um der waig wær--dort coom’d se yoh--muss now
aucht gevva----

_Alice._ [_Without observing KNICKERBOCKER_] doh, now gæ shlofa. Oh
Knickerbocker! Wann’d aw ’a wennich coryose bisht--ich gleich dich
doch--con ’s net helfa.

_Knick._ [_Aside._] Sell is awer now yusht about fershtendich----

_Alice._ Kæ wooner os ich ’n gleich--so ’n shaner, finer mon os ar is--un
aw so ivver ous hooch galarnd. Olly mohl os ich ’n aw gook feel ich os
wann ich ’n grawd um der hols nemma kent un ’n bussa un--[_Turning, she
is caught in the embrace of KNICKERBOCKER._]

_Knick._ Des is awer now amohl plesseerlich--’s is kæ engle fum himmel os
des beata con.

_Dame._ [_Without._] Gaisht mer now weck doh--du fersuffner lodle do!

_Knick._ Der deifel--es is so g’wiss os ich labe de Ripsy now, we wærd ’s
meer doh gæ--we now coom ich ous dare shkrape?

_Alice._ Wann se dich doh ferwisht don bin ich g’ruineert--du musht dich
arryats fershteckla--awer wo?

_Knick._ Yaw, wo? Sell is now de froke. Suppose ich shloop doh in den
shonk ni?

_Alice._ Nay, doh, fershteckle dich in den claider korb, un ich deck dich
tzu mit der dreckich wesh. Awer, nay, der korb is tzu klæ, di bæ sin tzu
long un der shonk is der ainsich plotz. Now yusht ni doh in der shonk.

_Knick._ Well, doh gaits.

    [_Music--She directs him to the closet and quickly closes the
    door. DAME enters L. 2 E., dragging in RIP._]

_Dame._ Now, doh hob ich dich amohl derhame, un ich will aw wissa wass du
tzu sawga husht for dich?

_Rip._ Nix, nix--gor nix--my leevy, shmarty fraw. We wennicher os mer
shwezt, du waisht, we besser os ’s gait, anyhow, ich bin ’s agreed os du
selwer olles sawga mawgsht wass tzu sawga is. Sell is now fair, is ’s
net, my gooty leevy fraw?

_Dame._ Well, wo sin all de hawsa un bottreesle os du hame bringa husht
wella?

_Rip._ Ei so feel os ich wase sin se marshtens drous im Blowa Barrick. De
fact is, we se mich hen sana cooma mit der flint waura se ’a wennich shy,
du waisht. My flint du’t aw ebmohls ferfaila, awer du ferfailsht ne net
wann ich ols unner di fire coom.

_Dame._ Shweffle un soltpater! We con ich all des shtanda? Wo is ’s geld
for der rent mit batzawla, du loompicher, fersuffner lodle du?

_Rip._ Wase g’wiss net--waisht du’s?

_Dame._ ’S naigsht ding os deer happened gaisht in de jail--sell wærd’s
end derfu si.

_Rip._ Coom now, ’s is net derwært os mer shtreit aw fonga derweaga.
Morga free is tzeit ganunk for shwetza weaga dem rent.

_Dame._ Yaw, morya--es is olsfort morya mit deer; so Alice, dort hucksht
aw un du’sht nix os fowlenesa, we for common--exactly we di bruder
doh--der sin’d mer now yusht about ’n shanes pawr nix nootziche un
waich-keppiche dinger.

_Rip._ Waich-keppich? Ich denk my kup is ordlich hordt un solid, for
wann ar net wær don wær ar shun long uf gaused--un sell is now ’n
fact--denksht net selwer so?

_Dame._ Un now, Alice, gaisht mit meer, for ich will sana wass’d gadu
husht mit de kinner, for mer con sich net maner uf dich ferlussa os uf
selly doppich, (_is retiring on R._,) shill-krut.

_Rip._ Shill-krut! Oh, well, olty, go ahead--gæ yusht so goot de gons
sow. Awer now, leevy hoonich, eb os ’d gaisht, wit net now so goot si un
mer selly klæ buttle gevva os ’d geshter owet fun mer weck g’shlipt husht?

_Dame._ Shweffle un soltpater! Ollaweil g’suffa un wid ols noch maner
whiskey! Na, kæ druppa maner! Desmohl gricksht kæ buttle fun meer.

    [_Exit with ALICE, R. H._]

_Rip._ Dooner uns wetter! De shwarnoat will ich krega wann ich now net
glawb os se ’s all selwer g’nooma hut! Awer, ich hob ’n naws so shorf os
meim hoond Shneider siney, un ich con ’s reecha fun weit ob. Now, doh
gaits for amohl ’n examination dorrich den shonk.

    [_Music.--RIP opens the closet door cautiously and rummaging for
    a bottle, when he treads on KNICKERBOCKER, who roars out lustily.
    RIP, in his sudden alarm, upsets the porcelain and glass; and
    falling, rolls into the middle of the chamber, quaking in every
    limb, and vociferating loudly._

_Rip._ Helf, mord, mord, fire, deeb!

    _KNICKERBOCKER, in the interim, darts out of the closet, and
    beyond the consciousness of future proceeding, throws himself
    into the arm chair.--ALICE, entering hastily, throws a cloak over
    him, which hides him from observation.--DAME enters, alarmed, R.
    H._

_Dame._ Shweffle un soltpater! Wass is now widder lose?

_Rip._ [_Raising his head cautiously._] Wass is letz! Ei ordlich
feel--der deifel is dort in sellam shonk--sell is whats der matter--der
deifel im letza plotz! Gott im Himmel, was kenna mer du mit ’m?

_Dame._ Der deifel im shonk! Den will ich awer aw sana. [_Going there
sees broken china._] Shweffle un solpater! All my besht g’sharr in
shticker ferbrucha! Du weeshter fersuffner ding du. Yaw, ’s is wohr--der
deifel war im shonk un du bisht selwer der meensht deifel uf ’m ards
budda. De saucha doh os now all in shticker sin hob ich g’shenkt grickt
fun miner grose-mommy! Oh, du lodle du! Ich con ’s nimmy shtanda. Ich wær
ohnmechtich--ich con net--(_She sinks in the arm chair, but immediately
starts up, and squalling, falls into RIP’S arms.--KNICKERBOCKER regains
the closet, unobserved by all save ALICE._)

_Dame._ Gott im Himmel! ’S war ebber in sellam shtool--ebber war dort, so
g’wiss os ich labe----

_Rip._ Oh, du bisht ous ’m kup. ’S is nix in sellam shtool os yusht
seller olt cloak (_tossing it aside_) seell is all.

_Dame._ ’S is mer bong--un, ich feel, ich wase selwer net we. Alice, du
mohl di hond in my sock un dort finnsht de buttle.

    [_ALICE produces the bottle._]

_Rip._ A klanes buttly! Oho! Sell is so’n sort fum a private shenkly--lus
mich ’s buttly now amohl haiva bis ’d ’n glaws bringsht for de olt fraw.

    [_ALICE hastening off, brings a wine glass from R. which RIP
    fills and gives to DAME._]

_Rip._ Un now, do gaits, tzum deifel un de fomelia un longs laiva un
g’sundheit.

    [_Drinks from the bottle; ALICE in the interview proceeds to the
    closet and brings KNICKERBOCKER out, who is making for the door,
    when, hearing some one approach he again escapes to his retreat._]

_Alice._ (_At door._) Oh Aunty, Aunty! Doh coom’d der Shquire dorrich der
gorda ruf!

_Dame._ Shweffle un soltpater! Ar coom’d now for der rent--wass is now
tzu du? Gott im Himmel wase ’s--ich net!

_Rip._ Ich glawb ich gæ in ’s bet--un consider derweaga.

_Dame._ Nay, du gaisht mer now net in ’s bet. Du musht now ’n frishy
excuse finna weaga dem rent. Es is di shoold os ’s is we ’s is, un du
mawgsht der now aw selwer helfa so goot os ’d consht, un ich gæ nous--tzu
der Wigrimsy un shwetz a weil mir era; un Alice, wann selly pedler fraw
widder coom’d sawg era os ich kens fum eram dreck hawa will.

    [_As DAME retires she meets DERRICK to whom she curtseys._

_Derr._ Good-n-owet.

_Dame._ Good-n-owet.

    [_Exit DAME._]

_Rip._ [_Aside._] ’S coomd mer fore os wann ich now in a ferdeivelty
shkrape wær! Alice, du mawgsht gæ. By chucks, ich wet ich wær aw arryats
soonsht.

_Alice._ (_Aside._) Un wass wærd now ous ’m awrm Knickerbocker--we wærd
’s eem now gœ?

    [_Exit, R. H._]

_Derr._ Well, Rip, my gooter un airlicher friend, we gaits ols by deer?
We du’t de welt dich ols usa?

_Rip._ Well, so so--nix weiters tzu brawla--shlecht gununk. Ich bin ’n
orrick fleisicher mon un du olly dawg hordt shaffa, fun free moryats bis
shpoat in de naucht, un mit all dem con ich sheer net tzu waig cooma,
un’des is now so wohr os ich labe--wann ’d ’s net glawbst don froke amohl
my olty--se con der sawga we hord os ich shaff, un we ainich os mer
proweera mitnonner tzu laiva.

_Derr._ Awer se sawga ols wo de buttle maishter is dort gaits ne net
yusht so abbordich goot.

_Rip._ Sell is a fact. Now, of course, du bisht cooma weaga ’m rent un
now, wann’d so goot si wid un--

_Derr._ Un ’a risseet shreiva--oh yaw, besure, for sell bin ich olsfort
ready--

_Rip._ Nay, nay, (_aside_) des beat now der deifel selwer!

_Derr._ Well, mer wella don ’n onners mohl fum rent shwetza. For dee
tzeit luss uns amohl weaga ebbas soonsht hondla.

_Rip._ Yaw, well, of course. Doh nem ’n shtool, un huck dich (_rubbing
his hands together_) ’s oltes recht. (_Aloud_,) nemsht anes--’s is rale
goots olts shtuft! [_They take chairs._]

_Derr._ Now Rip, ich glawb du kensht my ainsicher sohn--der same os du
amohl g’safed husht we ar in ’s wasswe g’falla is un sheer om fersowfa
war.

_Rip._ Oh yaw, een ken ich goot, un ’a wilder ding os ar is--awer ar is
aw ferdeihenkert shmart. (_Drinks._)

_Derr._ Un now will ich der amohl ebbas fun een sawga. Ar wohnt allaweil
in Nei Yorrick, un is om law shtuddeera. Ar is now ’n finer, soberer
un shmarter yunger mon, un weil sell so is het ich garn os ar sich doh
settled in der nochbershaft wo ar gabora un ufgatzoga is warra. Now,
wann amohl de tzeit coom’d het ich aw garn os ar sich ’n fraw nemt--’n
airlich, fines maidle--aney os gor nix wase fun de norrheita un dummheita
os in de grosse shtedt gadrivva wærra. Un de notion is mer so in der kup
cooma os ivver a weil--in etlich yohra, wann amohl di duchter uf g’woxa
is os se yusht about ’s very maidle wær for si fraw--fer een d’no hira.
’S is wohr, ar wær ’a wennich elder os see, awer sell maucht nix ous--’s
is anyhow feel besser os wann see ’s eldsht wær.

_Rip._ Awer coom now--’s dinkt mich du bisht yusht uf ’a wennich shposs
ous desmohl!

_Derr._ Nay, ’s is mer arnsht. Un for dich tzu satisfya derweaga hob ich
doh ’n shreivas mit gabrucht--eo’n contract, du waisht, os mer mitnonner
agreea os wann se olt ganunk sin os se hira, un wann anes fun ena ous
back’d os ’s onner d’no ’s property grickt. Ich bin ’s anyhow agreed ’n
shreivas tzu signa os ich ’m Herman, meim sohn, olles geb os ich hob uf
selly conditions, un wann du’s agreed bisht ’s same tzu du mit diner
duchter, un uf de same condition, ei don hen mer weiters nix tzu du os
yusht ’s bobbeer signa.

_Rip._ Yaw, well, of course bin ich ’s agreed. Ich bin willens era all my
geld un bank shtock un elles os ich hob tzu gevva--awer se mus ferdeivelt
shmart si wanna se ebbas finn’d. Coom, now, Mr. Squire, luss uns now
nochamohl anes nemma. (_Drinks._)

_Derr._ Un now, doh sin de tzwæ bobbeera--mer signa se all tzwæ un ich
nem anes un du nemsht ’s onner.

_Rip._ Yaw, ’s is all recht--doh gaits [_Drinks--DERRICK gives him the
pen._] un awer wass sull ich now du mit dara fedder doh?

_Derr._ Nix os yusht di nawma uf selly bobbeera signa.

_Rip._ Sell signa ona os my olty ebbas derfu wase? My gooter friend--sell
con ich net du. Se date mich levendich ob tzeega. [_Noise in the closet._]

_Rip._ Shtill, du hex.

_Derr._ Awer ich hob aw my mind uf gamaucht os wann du des now singsht os
du noch dem doh wohna beleiva mawgsht ona rent tzu batzawla.

_Rip._ Rent frei! Ich signs. Awer, halt a wennich. De olt fraw date der
deifel shpeela mit mer. So du ni shreiva in ’s bobbeer os ich ous ’m
contract nous backa con in tzwansich yohr un ea dawg, wann ich will.
[_Noise in the closet._]

_Rip._ Shtill, du hex.

_Derr._ [_Writing._] Yusht we du wit. [_Noise in closet._]

_Rip._ Shtill, du hex. [_Drinks._]

_Derr._ Is sell ’n cotz dort im shonk?

_Rip._ Ich wase net eb ’s ’n cotz is odder my hoond Shneider. Wann ’s
der Schneider is don wet ich net in siner howt si wann my olty tzurick
coom’d.

_Derr._ Doh, now, hob ich ’s ni g’shrivva we du g’sawt husht, in denna
wardta doh: “Wann awer der Rip Van Winkle de notion nemmt ous tzu backa
inside fun tzwansich yohr un ea dawg, don sull dar contract nix gilta.”

_Rip._ Yaw, yaw, Shquire--sell is now all recht--sell is goot--first-rate
now----

_Derr._ Un now consht ’s aw signa.

_Rip._ Wass--’s signa?

_Derr._ Yaw, yusht signs.

_Rip._ Har mit ’m bobbeer. (_Takes it._) My kup feel’d so coryose--os
wann ar soonersht sevversht wær--bin dormlich. (_Reading._) “Wann awer
der Rip Van Winkle”--yaw, yaw, sell is mich--“der Rip Van Winkle de
notion nemmt ous tzu backa inside fun tzwansich yohr un ea dawg.” Oh,
sell is recht. (_Writing._) R-i-p V-a-n--[_Noise in closet._]--Shtill du
hex! W-i-n-k-l-e--now doh is ’s.

_Derr._ Un doh is now ’s onner--’s copy derfu. (_Gives it._)

_Rip._ Demnoch is des doh for mich, un doh gaits now in my jacket sock ni.

_Derr._ Des is glawb ich now all recht--olles fartich, un ich sawg aw
good-naucht----

_Rip._ Shtup a wennich. Luss uns now noch anes mitnonner nemma. Awer,
holes mich der dihenker wann de buttle net lare is! Alice! Alice! Coom!
grick mer noch a wennich schnapps for der Shquire.

_Derr._ Nay, net desmohl--glawb ich will nix mæ den owet (_Rising_) awer
enniche tzeit wann ’d ols ebbas wid don roof yusht aw by diem olta friend
Rory--dort sull olsfort ’n buttle ready si for dich. So now, good-naucht.

_Rip._ Awer shtup, shtup--Ich glawb ich gæ grawd onna un grick selly
buttle now (_Rising._) Alice coom amohl har doh?

    _Enter ALICE, R. H._

_Rip._ Alice, grick mer amohl my hoot. (_ALICE gives it._) Un now geb
aucht uf ’s house bis ich tzurick coom. Wann de olt fraw fore mere
hame coom’d don sawg er ich wær nous g’luffa mit ’m Shquire uf orrick
particulary bisness.

    [_Exit, L. D., with DERR._]

    [_ALICE advances and brings KNICKERBOCKER from the closet._]

_Alice._ Gook, so g’wiss, ols noch doh!

_Knick._ Yaw, olles os noch fun mer ivverich is, un ich insures os se
mich in a hurry nimmy den wæg fonga, un now will ich mich aw grawd ous ’m
shtawb maucha. [_Goes towards the door and returns in sudden alarm._]

_Knick._ Hohls mich der bettle wann now net de Ripsy widder coom’d--un
ich wase net wass tzu du!

_Alice._ Sell is now all di eagny shuld--ferwass warsh’d so detarmined
den owet tzu cooma?

_Knick._ Un ich glawb net os ich si lava widder coom--for wann se mich
doh ferwisht don gebt ’s aw widder amohl orrick doonkler shmoke in der
kich!

_Alice._ ’S is now yusht ea plan for era ous ’m waig tzu cooma, un sell
is, du now seller olt pedler fraw era claider aw shlippa--doh sin se, un
ich insures os du kæ difficulty finnsht for ous ’m house tzu cooma.

_Knick._ Nay, un aw mit ’m ’a bookle ful shlaig in der barya--awer ich
geb nix um sell.

    [_KNICKERBOCKER sits in arm chair and is attired by ALICE in
    woman’s dress; on rising, the petticoats but reach his knees._]

_Knick._ De unnerclaider sin awer beim bettle tzu kortz--net holwer long
ganunk!

_Alice._ Der arricksht troovel is os di bæ evva tzu long sin--sell is
whats der matter mit der. Du musht dich evva bigga--un sawg aw nix,
mitout du musht shwetza, for wann ’d ’s maul net haltsht don ferluss dich
druf os ’d aw ous g’foona wærsht. [_He again sits._]

    _DAME enters, D. F._

_Dame._ Well, doh bin ich widder tzurick un ich sæ der Van Slaus is
faurt. Un wo is seller lodle, der Rip? Widder drous ommanot. Un wær is
sell os dort in sellam shtool huckt?

_Alice._ Sell is de olt pedler fraw--se is cooma for era sauch os se doh
g’lust hut.

_Dame._ De pedler fraw! Now, yusht ob mit der--ous ’m house mit all deim
dreck.

_Knick._ (_Aside._) Yaw, wann ich yusht amohl safe drous wær!

    [_KNICKERBOCKER rises, hobbles forward, R.; but forgetting the
    shortness of the petticoats, in curtseying, is discovered by the
    DAME, from the exposure of his legs._

_Dame._ Shweffle un solpater! Wær husht now doh? ’N humbug--’n pedler
fraw mit so bæ we selly! (_She rushes up to door and locks it--then with
a broom, L. U. E., pursues him round--he flings bonnet in her face._

_Knick._ Wann der deifel hinner ame is mus mer sich waira--un doh gaits.

    [_He jumps through the window, which is dashed to pieces, he
    disappears.--DAME rushes up, with broom, toward window.--ALICE
    laughs._

_Dame._ Un du lauchsht mich noch ous, du shlomp du! Anes is yusht so
shlecht os ’s onner. All du’n mich yusht abusa un uf mich imposa--un now
ob mit der, grawd nuf un ins bet.

    [_DAME drives ALICE off, and follows, R.--Scene closes._


SCENE IV.--_Half dark.--A front wood.--The report of a gun is
heard--shortly after, RIP enters, with his fowling piece, L. H._

_Rip._ Wip-per-will! Es is mer maner bong os se der awram olt Rip noch
wippa. (_Takes aim at bird--it flashes in the pan._) Widder ferfaild!
Sull der deifel all de missa un missussa hohla! Ken ainsicher shoos con
ich mæ maucha uf ’m fliggle! Ich wut ich het ’n flint os we ’m Bill
Bifflemoyer siney--aney os um ’n eck rumm sheest--d’no date ich se awer
fetcha. Awer, ’s maucht net feel ous wann ich aw olly dawg finf hoonert
hawsa un feggle sheesa date--de olt fraw wær doch net g’satisfied. Net os
se yusht abbordich mean is, awer se mus ebber odder ebbas hawa for gowtza
un tzonka, un ich bin for common der unglicklich mon os ’s ols fong’d
fun era roat gleedich haisy tzoong. Un now, so bol os ich hame coom fong
ich ’s aw widder mit ’m baisa shteel! Dooner wetter! Ich feel meed, un
shlefferich. Ich glawb ich gæ now net hame, for wann ich du don ferbrecht
se mer anyhow my bookle--un ich gæ nuf in der Blowa Barrick un shlofe
dort de naucht, un morya fong ich ’n neie rule aw--os ich kæ druppa mæ
drink.

_Voice Outside._ Rip Van Winkle!

    [_A dead pause ensues.--Suddenly, a noise, like the rolling of
    cannon balls is heard--then a discordant shout of laughter, L.
    H.--RIP wakes and sits up, astonished._

_Rip._ Wass der deivel is now sell? Is my fraw um der waig? Oh, nay,
sell is ’s net. Ich denk ich hob yusht gadrawm’d--so now, don gaits for
nochamohl ’a wennich shlofa--for desmohl bin ich ordlich weit ous eram
range. [_Reclines and sleeps._

_Voice Outside._ Rip Van Winkle. [_The laugh being repeated, RIP again
awakes._

_Rip._ Desmohl bin ich gawiss net letz. Es hut beim bettle shpooks odder
ebbas-a-so doh im dem barrick, un ich hob now kæ druppa doh for se ob
halta!

_Swaggrino._ [_Without L. H._] Rip Van Winkle! Rip Van Winkle!

_Rip._ Rip Van Winkle! Sell is mich, yaw, besure is ’s mich.

    [_Music.--SWAGGRINO, the grotesque dwarf, enters L. H., bending
    beneath the weight of a large cask which he bears on his
    shoulder. He pauses, examines RIP, then invites him to assist him
    in placing the cask on the ground, which RIP complies with._

_Rip._ Hole mich der dihenker wann des awer now net ’n coryose tzwæ
bainich creddoor is--wass is ’s, anyhow?

    _Music.--SWAGGRINO pointing to the cask, entreats RIP’S
    assistance, in bearing it up the mountain._

_Rip._ Hetsht garn os ich der helf? Ferwass husht mer sell net grawd uf
amohl g’sawt? Well, well, ich will ’m don helfa, for so’n load we sell is
tzu feel for so’n klanes olts menly we des doh.

    [_Music.--DWARF assists in placing cask on RIP’S shoulder--a loud
    laugh is heard--RIP is alarmed, but DWARF signs him to proceed
    and be of good courage--leads way up rocks R.--another peal of
    laughter, and RIP hastily follows him._


SCENE V.--_Dark.--The Sleepy Hollow, in the bosom of the mountains
occupying the extreme extent of the stage,--stunted trees, fragments of
rocks in various parts.--Moon in the horizon; the entrance to this wild
recess being by an opening from the abyss in the rear of the glen._

    _Music.--Grotesque Dutch figures with enormous masked heads and
    lofty tapering hats, discovered playing at cards in various
    places, others at dutch pins--battledores and shuttlecocks--the
    majority seated on a rock drinking and smoking._

_Gauderkin._ Heit is unser fire dawg. Fooftzich yohr is unser tzeit im
barrick doh, un luss uns all now looshtich si.

_Icken._ De froke is now weaga ’m fowla ding, os mer im owet hen nooner
g’shickt for ebbas fun der goota schnappsish awrt--wo war ar g’west de
longa tzeit?

_Gaud._ Ferleicht hut ebber eem troovel g’maucht--

_Icken._ Wann sell so is, was sawgt er now; we long un wass for ’n awrt
de shtrofe?

_Gaud._ Tzwansich yohr im doda shlofe. Awer wann ar goot g’noddoord un
looshtich is, don luss ’n goots gadrawm enjoya.

_Icken._ Unser bruder coom’d--dort coomd ar ivver de felsa ruf, un mit ’m
coomd ’n fremmer ding in mensha g’shtalt.

_Omnes._ Tzwansich yohr im doda shlofe. Sell is now dem ding si shtrofe.
Ar coom’d, ar coom’d--sei’d all now shtill, doh coomd ar now.

    [_The spirits retire up and station themselves in motionless
    attitudes. Music.--SWAGGRINO descends by the opening in the rear,
    followed by RIP, with the keg.--RIP advances on the L. H.; and,
    with the assistance of his conductor, places the cask on the
    rock. The spirits remain immovable in front._

_Rip._ Now bin ich awer ’n doder mon, in coryose un fremmy coompany! Wass
gebt ’s now mit meer? Wann ich yusht widder derhame wær--yaw, noch gor
derhame by miner olty. Orrick os sell is, ’s wær doch besser os in so ’m
crowd we dar doh!

    _Music.--The figures severally advance, and stare at him,
    then resume their games. SWAGGRINO taps the cask, motions the
    astonished RIP to assist him in distributing its contents into
    various flagons; an injunction with which he complies.--SWAGGRINO
    helps his companions._

_Rip._ (_On L. H._) Om end sin des doch ordlich gooty karls. Se sin anyhow
net bais, un du ’n ame nix. Un se sin aw all shtumm un dawb. Gott im
Himmel! Wann yusht my fraw so goot un fridlich era maul halta date! Ich
glawb by chucks os des all hexa sin. Un ’s coom’d mer fore se du’n sich
goot enjoya. Ich wooner awer now wass for shtuft os se in dem fessly
doh hen? Of course, ’s shod nix wann mer anes mit ena nemmt. (_Fills a
flagon._) Doh gaits now--olles tzum deifel un fomelia tzu’m deifel un
g’sundheit un long’s lava. [_Drinks._

_Omnes._ Ha, ha, ha!

    [_Music.--A grotesque dance ensues, during which RIP continues
    to supply himself from the keg.--He at length joins in the
    dance, and becomes so exhausted, that he reels forward and sinks
    in front. The dancing ceases, the spirits utter three ho, ho,
    ho’s!--Some of them sink.--Music, piano, as the curtain slowly
    descends._


END OF ACT I.




ACT II.


SCENE I.--_The last of the First Act repeated; but the distance now
presents a richly cultivated country.--The bramble is grown into a lofty
tree, and all that remains of RIP’S gun is its rusty barrel, which is at
the foot of the tree._

    _Bird Music.--RIP discovered extended on the ground asleep;
    his hair gray, and beard grown to unusual length--the hour of
    the scene is gray dawn and the birds from the sky and hill are
    chirping._

_Rip._ (_Speaking in his sleep._) Mommy! Mommy Van Winkle! Wass du’sht
allaweil? Shtup now yusht eh mohl mit deim gatzonk? Du lusht mer gor
ne kæ ruh--har-uf now, un shmeis mer net so feel hase wasser doh rumm,
for my awga kenna ’s net shtanda--du wid! Uf course, un wann ’d wid don
du’shts aw--un demnoch husht aw.--(_He awakens in sudden emotion._)
Awer--immer un eawich wass is all des, un wo bin ich? (_Gazing around._)
Uf ’m Blowa Barrick so g’wiss ich labe. Un ich fong ’s aw wann ich hame
coom--weil ich now de gons naucht doh g’shlofa hab. Un ich feel so
shteif os ’n olter asle uf ’m Lechaw Conawl. Es dinkt mich ich mus ’n
ordlich longy tzeit doh g’shlofa hawa. Awer ich hob mich aw goot enjoyd
unner denna coryose un looshtiche dinger. Mer hen gadroonka un gadonsd
un g’frollickd we gooty karls. Awer wann se now gooty moneer hetta don
wæra se net doh fun mer weck g’shneekd un hetta mich doh allainich lya
lussa. (_Looking around._) Wo is awer my flint? Ich hob se doh shtæ lussa
wedder ’m a klaina baimly. (_On examining he finds the rusty barrel of
his gun._) Hullo! gook yusht amohl doh--de karls hen so g’wiss ich labe
aw my flint g’shtola un hen dar olt ous g’shpeelt un rushtich lawf im
plotz derfu g’lusst. Un wass wærd my olty sawga derweaga? By chucks awer
desmohl gebt ’s ’n gabuller derhame! Un we ich ei g’shlofa bin war ’s
unner ’m ’a klaina baimly, un doh shtate now ’n grosser hickory bawm. Ich
wooner eb ich now wocker bin odder eb ich yusht om drawma bin? Is ennich
ebber um der wæg os mer ’s sawga con? Ich bin now yusht about ferhootled!
Es is yusht ea ding os ich du con un sell is heme gæ tzu der olt fraw--se
con mer ’s exactly sawga eb ich wocker bin odder eb ich om shlofa un
drawma bin. Wann ich om shlofa bin don insure ich ’s aw os ich ordlich in
a hurry uf weck wann ich amohl unner de range fun miner olty coom.

    [_Music.--Exit, L. H._]


SCENE II.--_A well furnished apartment in the house of KNICKERBOCKER._

    _LORRENNA, now a woman, enters R. H._

_Lor._ Yaw, ’s is hord. Ich hob kæ eltra g’hot sidder os ich ’n gons
klæ maidly war. ’N gooty aunt hut for mich g’sorrickd un hut mer plenty
fermaucht, awer now, olles os ich hob mus ich uf gevva wann ich net agree
’n mon tzu hira os mer gor net aw shtate. Oh, my ormer dawdy! We ar sell
shrivas g’signed hut, we ich noch gons klæ war, hut ar net gawist wass
for ’n troovel os ar uf mich bringt.

    _KNICKERBOCKER and ALICE enter L. H. arm in arm. They are much
    more corpulent than when seen in Act I and dressed in modern
    attire,--ALICE in the extreme of former fashion._

_Knick._ Decide according tzu’m bashta fershtond. Weis war anyhow
net shwartz. Nemond hut mer my argument answera kenna. (_Speaking as
entering._) Coom--ei Lorrenna, bisht aw doh? Awer du gooksht os wann du
im troovel wærsht. Wo faild ’s? Shwetz rous--is ebbas letz?

_Lor._ Ich bin der feel donk shuldich for wass, os du proweert husht tzu
du for mich. Awer ich bin im troovel, un ich con ’s net helfa. My troovel
is weaga dem Herman Van Slaus--

_Alice._ Ich wase exactly wo ’s fail’d. Es hut mich aw shun orrick feel
gatroovel’d un hob aw feel shlofe ferlora weaga deer--

_Knick._ Yaw, sell is wohr. De Alice un ich hen shun uft derweaga
g’shwetzt--awer, si goots moots--

_Alice._ Yaw, si goots moots--es coom’d ferleich noch olles recht--geb
net uf--

_Lor._ Der Gustaffe--ar is der ainsich mon os ich im sin hob tzu hira.

_Knick._ Un der Gustaffe is aw able olles recht tzu maucha. Si shiff is
all recht, un wann ’m nix abbordichs happened don is ar aw ’n orrick
reicher mon. So feel os ich hob ous finna kenna, is si shiff shun aw
galand in Nei Yorrick un in a pawr dawg coomd ar aw os ’d ’n selwer sana
consht.

_Lor._ Sell is tzu goot ’s tzu glawa. Bisht now sure os ar all recht is,
un os ar coomd?

_Knick._ Sure? Of course bin ich ’s sure, so now, si mer goots moots. (_A
knock is heard._)

_Knick._ Horrich! Ebber coom’d now. ’S date mich gor net woonera wann ’s
der Gustaffe wær--odder ebber soonsht--

    _Enter SOPHIA L. H._

_Soph._ Der Hermon Van Slaus is drous in der front shtoob un ar date eich
garn sana.

_Alice._ Sell is awer net der mon os mer expect hen.

_Knick._ Der sohn fum olta Van Slaus! We mer der deifel nennt coomd ar
sure ols aw garennd.

_Soph._ Un ar wær garn introduced doh by eich.

_Knick._ Well, luss ’n ri cooma. ’N airlicher mon brauch sich net for ’m
deifel selwer farrichta.

    [_Exit SOPHIA, L._

_Lor._ Un ich glawb ich mauch mich ous ’m wæg--gæ in ’n onnery shtoob----

_Knick._ All recht. Luss des ding yusht tzu meer--ich con ’n mannetsha.
Ar is ’n ferflomter rascal, un ar gait mer aw noch in ’n orrick haiser
plotz--ich insures os ae du’t.

_Alice._ Un now mind--luss ’n net ahead cooma. Mauch kortzy arwet mit ’m.

_Knick._ Uf sell consht dich ferlussa.

    _Enter HERMAN, L. H._

_Her._ Doh bin ich noch amohl. De tzeit is now cooma for secura wass my
recht is according tzu law, un ’s is net derwært os ennich ebber proweert
mich lenger drous tzu halta.

_Knick._ Well, mer wella don amohl sana derweaga. Ea ding bin ich sure,
un sell is os ’s maidle net im sin hut era fermaiga uf tzu gevva, un du
consht dich aw druf ferlussa os du se net hawa consht for ’n fraw. Du
bisht net exactly der mon doe so’n fines maidle we de Lorrenna.

_Herr._ Ains odder ’s onner mus se du, un se con sich net helfa. Du
waisht selwer os de law uf miner side is--mind sell--ich hob de law uf
miner side.

_Knick._ Es con si os ’s is we du sawgsht. De law du’t ebmohls acta in
favor fun spitz-boova.

_Herm._ Du consht awer net ferlaigna os sell shreivas de gons bisness
settled.

_Knick._ Oh, nay, ich ferlaigle nix. Der Olt Rip hut sell shreivas
g’signed. De fact is, ich wase os ar hut, for ich war net orrick weit
ob we ar ’s gadu hut. Un ich wase aw os ar net compus mentis war we di
ous g’shpeelter dawdy een in de bisness ni gaplaudert hut. Ich wase os
ar der advantage g’nooma hut fum Rip, un os ’s gonsa ding nix is os ’n
batroog, un os ebber de penitentiary ferdeend hut.

_Herm._ Ich bin net cooma, for insult tzu wærra. Ich bin cooma for
justice according tzu der law. De Lorrenna is my, odder all era property
is my, un der kennt du mitnonner wass der wet. Sell is ’s shreivas un
sell is de law.

    [_Exit L. H._

_Knick._ Well, yusht gæ--un gæ tzu’m deifel wo’d onna g’harshd. De
Lorrenna gricksht anyhow net, un so long os ich brod hob for se sull se
aw kæ noat leida.

    _LORRENNA enters, with ALICE, R._

_Lor._ Ich sæ du bisht ’n lose--der weesht ketzer.

_Knick._ Well, yaw, so weit. Awer, ar shticht dertzu we ’n shill-krut in
era shawl, un ’s is mer bong ar gebt uns om end noch troovel.

_Alice._ Un der recht wæg wær wann ar widder coomd ’n kessel ful hase
wasser uf ’n ous laira. Awer ich mus der ebbas sawga. We mer tzu’m
fenshter nous gagookt hen, is ’n orrick finer yunger mon dorrich ’s
shteddle g’ridda, un ’s date mich gor net ferwoonera wann ’s----

    _GUSTAFFE rushes in, L. H._

_Lor._ [_Hurries to him._] Ei, so g’wiss ich labe, ’s is dich! My leever
Gustaffe!

_Gust._ (_Embracing her._) Un doh fin ich now my eagner hoonich--de
Lorrenna--Lorrenna!

_Knick._ Ei Gustaffe--des gookt mer sheer os wann ’d about so orrick uf
de Lorrenna wærsht os yeamohls.

_Gust._ Un Knickerbocker--du gooksht ivver ous frish un g’sund. We
coomsht ols aw, anyhow?

_Knick._ Well, ich con anyhow net clawga. Du waisht, ich bin evva ’n
Shquire, un orrick hoch aw g’sæ by de leit. Awer fun sellam wella mer now
nix sawga. Sidder os de Lorrenna un der Gustaffe by nonner sin hen meer
kæ bisnese mæ doh. [_Exit KNICKERBOCKER and ALICE._

_Gust._ Un now, Lorrenna, es dinkt mich du gooksht os wann ebbas letz
wær--wo faild ’s?

_Lor._ Yaw, es is ordlich feel letz. Ich bin im troovel. Es con net si
os ich di fraw geb. Ich hob nix un bin awrm. Der troovel is os my ormer
dawdy for yohra tzurick ’n shreivas g’signed hut os mer now all my
fermaiga weck nemt.

_Gust._ Awer Lorrenna, ich bin net uf fernmaiga ous--my mainung is os ich
dich hira will--net di lond un geld un rints fee. Un now sawg ich, bisht
reich odder awrm, os du evva doch my eagny seesy Lorrenna bisht.

_Lor._ Ich con awer net helfa os des ding mich troovelt. Ich will now
olles tzu meim goota uncle lussa--we ar mer sawgt so will ich du.

    [_Exit R. H._


SCENE III.--_The town of RIP’S nativity, instead of the village as
presented in first scene of the drama:--It is now a populous and
flourishing settlement.--On the spot where RORY’S tap house formerly
stood, is a handsome hotel and the sign of “George III” is altered into
that of “George Washington.” A settee in front, with table.--The harbor
is filled with shipping.--Music at the opening of the scene._

    _SETH SLOUGH, the landlord enters from the Hotel.--Loud shouts,
    L. H. 3 E._

_Seth._ Well, ich denk de ’lection is about ferbei. Wann de temperance,
leit ’s g’winna, don geb ich uf un ferkawf ous, for d’no shtate ’n wært
odder ’n saloon keeper net so feel chance os ’n mook im a g’witter
shtorm. [_Laugh U. E. R._] Hullo--wær der deihenker is don dar olt ding
doh? Ar gookt os wann ar about fooftzich yohr dode wær g’west un d’no ous
’m grawb rous g’fetsht for ’s temperance ticket tzu vota.

    [_Music.--Enter male and female villagers, laughing.--Enter
    RIP,--they gather round him._

_Rip._ Wo ich war is wass mich now woonert? Sawg, eer leit, kent er
deitsh shwetza?

_Villagers._ Haw, haw, haw.

_1st. Vill._ Sawg, du, olter ding, husht nix g’sana fum ’a olta shpinrawd
odder ebbas fun seller awrt ommanot doh rumm shpringa?

_Rip._ Nay, ich hob kæ so’n ding sana doh rumm shpringa.

_Villagers._ Haw, haw.

_1st Villager._ Un wær is di bolweerer? Un wann husht ’n ’s letsht mehl
gapatronized?

_Rip._ De saucha con ich net fershtæ, es gookt olles so ferennert sidder
geshter owet--un ich aw--my bawrd is by chucks sheer so long os ’n ku
shwans, un aw sheer shnæ weis!

_Seth._ (_Coming down._) Now, sawg du olter mon--ich denk du besser
gaisht hame un wesht dich un lusht dich bolweera.

_Rip._ Oh, never mind. My olty wærd mich shun bolweera wann ich hame
coom. Awer, wo der bettle is my haimet? Ich bin about om plotz wo ’s ols
war, awer ’s is net doh un ich bin a wennich os we ferhootled. Un now,
sawg mer amohl, woonsht ommanot doh naigsht om Blowa Barrick?

_Seth._ Ei, of course wohn ich doh.

_Rip._ Don consht mer ferleicht sawga wo ich wohn?

_Seth._ According tzu diner appearance date ich sawga du woonsht narryats
abbordich except ebmohls doh un ’n onners mohl dort.

_Rip._ Awer now for de wohret. Du wohnsht ommanot doh in der nochbershaft
fum barrick--net so?

_Seth._ Be sure du ich.

_Rip._ Un waisht net os ich aw ommanot doh wohn?

_Seth._ Nay, de krenk will ich krega wann ich sell wase. Es date mich
awer gor net ferwoonera wann du ous ’m olt Noah siner orrich g’shloopt
wærsht.

_Rip._ Is ’s don now miglich os du nix fun Rip Van Winkle waisht?

_Seth._ Rip Van Winkle! Der gresht whiskey siffer im gonsa shtate.

_Rip._ Sell is a fact--sell maned der Rip--du husht recht.

_Seth._ Yaw, ich hob shun uft fun ’m g’hared. Der olt ding is awer
dode--shun de tzwansich yohr.

_Rip._ So so. Demnoch bin ich dode, un ich expect os sell aw so is.
Es du’t mer awer doch laid, for der Olt Rip war ’n ordlich gooter
karl--anyhow.

_Seth._ Un ich wet yusht ’s het orrick feel so karls doh om Blowa
Barrick, for d’no het mer aw plenty gooty customers--for ar hut whiskey
g’nunk sowfa kenna for ’n grose meel rawd tzu runna.

_Rip._ Awer now, di g’shwetz fun weaga whiskey maucht mich so dorshtich
feela os wann ich ’n gons quart sols g’fressa het.

_Seth._ Well don, ward a wennich--ich will der ebbas bringa--ebbas os
dich uf tuned.

    [_Exit into house._

_Rip._ Un hole mich der bettle wann doh net noch ’n ferennerung is. Des
doh war ’m Rory si house geshter owet [_SETH re-enters_] mit ’m kainich
si picter uf ’m sign.

_Seth._ Sell is awer de ercht sort fun a ferennerung.

_Rip._ [_Reading_] “George Washington,” wær is now sell? [_Taking the
jug._] Well, doh gaits, tzu ’m deifel un General Washington un si fomelia
un g’sundheit! So so, don is evva der olt Rip dode, un wann ar dode is,
wass wærd ous siner fraw!

_Seth._ Oh, se is aw shun long dode. Se hut amohl ’n oder fershprengt we
se drau war ’m ’a Yankee pedler Hail Columby gevva, un sell hut se ob
g’fixd.

_Rip._ De olt fraw aw dode! Well, well, don is demnoch era tzung now aw
in der eawich ruh! [_Pause._] Un awer, se war evva doch my olty, un now,
bin ich aw dode! Se war a wennich hord uf mich, awer weil se dode is will
ich era now olles fergevva. Awer, now, sawg du--

_Seth._ Ich con nimmy lenger mich uf halta doh mit deer. De lection is
about ferbei, un ich mus now de drinks uf setza for de boova.

    _Re-enter VILLAGERS, shouting, R. H._

_Seth._ Doh, boova, was denkt er now fun dem olta ding doh? Ich geb ’n uf.

    [_Exit into house._

_2d. Vill._ Bisht du ’n Democrawt odder ’n Republican?

_Rip._ De wohret tzu sawga, ich bin a wennich fermixd--

_2d. Vill._ Well, awer wass sin di politics?

_Rip._ Oh, my politics? Dort bin ich all recht--ich shtick so goot os
amohl tzum kainich fum lond. Hurra for der Kainich George!

_Villagers._ ’N olter tory is ar! Weck wit ’m--mauch ’n dode--fersowf ’n
im meel dom!

    _Music.--They seize RIP and are about hurrying him off when
    GUSTAFFE rushes from L. 1 E. and throws them off._

_Gust._ Tzurick doh, eer cowards.

_Omnes._ Cowards! Sawg sell nochamohl!

_Gust._ Yaw, ich sawg ’s nochamohl. Nemond os ’n coward date so ’n olter
gro-keppicher mon so abusa.

_Rip._ Yaw, yaw, sell is so!

_Gust._ Un now, tzurick mit eich! Wann aner fun eich den olta mon now
yusht aw raigt, don ferlusst eich druf os ich aw derbei bin. [_Drives
them off._] Un now, sawg mer, olter mon, wass husht gadu os se dich hen
abusa wella?

_Rip._ Ei ich wase ’s g’wiss net. Waisht du’s?

_Gust._ Es coom’d mer fore du wærsht a wennich uf g’mixd. Con ich ebbas
du for dich?

_Rip._ Well, yaw. Si now so goot un sawg mer wo ich wohn. Sell is about
all os ich wissa will.

_Gust._ Ei waisht du’s net?

_Rip._ Nay, be dam wann ich du!

_Gust._ Wass is don di nawma?

_Rip._ Ei ich was ols der Rip Van Winkle.

_Gust._ Der Rip Van Winkle! Awer sell is unmiglich.

_Rip._ Well, ich wase net we ’s is. Ich date by chucks glawb ich selwer
net dertzu shwaira.

_Gust._ Awer sawg mer, husht du ’n duchter?

_Rip._ Besure hob ich--de Lorrenna, ’n ivver ous shmarty duchter, un hob
aw ’n sohn--awer de duchter is ’n maidle.

_Gust._ Un b’sinnsht dich druf os ’d yeamohls ’n shreivas g’signed husht
os di duchter aner Herman Van Slaus hira mus?

_Rip._ Oh, yaw, ich wase ’s goot, we der Shquire Van Slaus geshter on my
house cooma is un hut mich maucha my nawma uf sell bobbeer shreiva--awer
ich war evva g’suffa.

_Gust._ Geshter owet! Der awrm mon! Ar is net by seim fershtond--awer ich
bin doch now g’satisfied os ’s een is. Coom, olter mon, coom mit meer!

_Rip._ Awer so wid mich onna nemma?

_Gust._ Tzu diner duchter.----

_Rip._ Yaw, yaw--yaw well, du’s; nem mich tzu era. Ich bin so ferennert
os ’s mer bong is os se mich aw fergessa hut. Awer, nay, ’s con net si os
se era eagner dawdy fergest. Coom, coom on!


SCENE IV.--_KNICKERBOCKER’S House as before._

    _KNICKERBOCKER, ALICE and LORRENNA enter, R._

_Knick._ Hurrah for unser side! Mer hen se gabutta! Bin in de in de Samly
ni g’lect warra yusht we gor nix!

_Alice._ Wær is elect?

_Knick._ Ich selwer bin elect? Hurrah for de hurrah! Ich feel so goot os
wann ich nuf in der mond ni jumpa kent. (_Dances._) Fall-lal-lal-la.----

    _Enter HERMAN, L._

_Knick._ Well, wass der deifel bringt dich widder doh har?

_Herm._ Ich bin cooma for ’m mailde era hond odder era arbshaft--’s
maucht mer nix ous wellas.

_Alice._ Slawg ’n um--ich feel os wan ich ’m de awga ous ’m kup rous
reisa kent----

_Herm._ Awer now, Mr. Knickerbocker----

_Knick._ Der Semly mon fun Macungie, wann’d so goot si wid!

_Herm._ Der Judge fun der Court is heit im shteddle, un ar is aw ready
for des ding tzu decida in my favor according tzu der law--for de law is
all uf miner side. Un d’no wann ’s amohl decide is don will ich aw my
rechta hawa, according tzu justice.

_Knick._ Well, du finnsht mich ready fore ’m Judge. Ich hob awer aw im
sin ’n aid tzu nermna un tzeigniss gevva--Ich wase aw a wennich ebbas
(_Aside._) Awer es is mer doch bong os ’s om end letz gait, un ich feel
net goot derweaga.

_Lor._ Uncle--leever uncle, wass is now tzu du in dem troovel?

_Knick._ Tzu du? Dei arbshaft is so goot os ferlora. Awer, du bleibsht
mer frei, un so long os ich labe----

_Gust._ (_Entering._) Hurrah! Hurrah for dich der Knickerbocker is all
recht----

_Knick._ Un fergess ’s net os ich now ’n Semly mon bin--ni g’lect beim
freia un independenta fulk, un ’s is mæ air in so ’m ’a omt os wann ich
’n kainich gabora wær.

    [_Exeunt R. H._


SCENE LAST.--_The Court House.--An arm chair at the back, in front of
which is a large table covered with baize.--On each side, a gallery.--On
the R. of table are chairs._

    _Music.--The JUDGE discovered in C., seated.--The galleries
    filled with auditors.--HERMAN, L. H.--KNICKERBOCKER R._

_Judge._ Well, now, Mr. Knickerbocker, bring amohl sell maidle fore de
Court.

    [_KNICKERBOCKER goes off, and returns with LORRENNA and ALICE, R.
    H. 1 E._

_Judge._ Geb denna weibsleit shteel os se sich setza kenna.

    [_LORRENNA and ALICE sit on R. H._

_Herm._ Un now, Judge, de tzeit is cooma os ich entitled bin tzu justice.
Es is now tzwansich yohr sidder des bobeer g’signed is warra tzwisha meim
dawdy un ’m dawdy fun dem maidle doh un according tzu dem agreement is
all era arbshaft my property. [_Presents document to the JUDGE._

_Judge._ [_Reading_] “Agreed tzwisha ’m Derrick Van Slaus, Esquire, un
’m Rip Van Winkle, os der Herman Van Slaus un de Lorrenna Van Winkle
engaged sin for hira wann se all tzwæ uf elt sin. Un wann anes fun ena
ous back’d don is ’s agreed os ’s onner entitled is tzu’m property fun
sellam os so ous back’d.

                                                       Rip Van Winkle,
                                                       Herman Van Slaus.”

Awer doh is noch maner: “Wann awer der Rip Van Winkle inside fun
tzwansich yohr un ea dawg des agreement refusa will, don hut ar ’s recht
so tzu du.

                                                      Derrick Van Slaus.”

Des bobbeer is all recht. Der Rip Van Winkle con of course net refusa
weil ar shun long dode is. Is now ebber doh os uf aid batzeiga con os des
doh ’m Rip Van Winkle si nawma is--os ar ’n selwer g’shrivva hut?

_Herm._ Der Knickerbocker wase ’s selwer os der nawma all recht
is--g’shrivva beim Rip Van Winkle, un wann ar airlich is don sawgt ar aw
so.

_Knick._ Airlich! Du bisht mer now ’n shaner ding for doh in de Court
cooma un shwetza fun airlichkeit! Un now, sawg mer amohl, we un uf wass
for ’n waig is seller nawma grickt warra?

_Herm._ Ei weil der Rip Van Winkle hut hawa wella os si duchter goot
fersorrick’d wærra sul, un ar hut des very ding proposed tzu meim
fershtorwena dawdy----

_Knick._ Sell is ’n ferflomty leeg.

_Judge._ Coom now, nemond darraf ’n onnerer ’n ligner hasa in dara Court.

_Herm._ Now, Judge, consht sana wass for leit os des sin de mich ous mina
rechta batreega wella.

_Lor._ (_Comes down stage._) All my huffnung is demnoch om end. Alles
fore mer is doonkle in----

_Herm._ (_Advances._) Tzuletsht du ich g’winna! Un now, Lorrenna, di hond
odder di arbshaft!

_Lor._ My hond? Nay, my hond is net for dich. Ormoot, kronkheit,
troovel--ennich ebbas os mer happena con, awer net my hond tzu deer!

_Judge._ Well don, doh is ’m Rip Van Winkle si hind shrivas. Es is net
ferlaig’nt, un of course, der contract mus ous g’feerd wærra.

_Lor._ Oh, Alice! Nem mich hame. Dode odder ennich ebbas, leever os mich
aw shleesa on den hesslicha mon! [_She is led off by ALICE, R. H._

_Knick._ Ei Judge--tzu’m dooner wedder--

_Judge._ Mr. Knickerbocker!

_Knick._ Excuse mich--ich mane kæ insult tzu der Court--ich----

_Judge._ Un ich hob decide, Mr. Knickerbocker.

_Knick._ So, so, du husht decide. Well. Awer ich luss ’s net derbei. Ich
nem ’n appeal on a haichery Court. Ich bin now ’n Semly mon, un wann de
law is os so ’n klutz we du ’n Jusge si con don gæ ich nei for ’n hocher
tox uf hemlock un gail pine!

    [_Exit in a rage._

_Judge._ Tzwansich yohr un ea dawg--sell is de exact tzeit according tzu
dem bobbeer, un weil der Rip dode is con ar ’s aw net widderrufa----

_Herm._ Un de tzeit is so goot os ferflussa--yusht noch a pawr
shtoond--un my case is so clear os ar si con.

    _Enter GUSTAFFE and RIP L. H._

_Gust._ Si net gons so orrick in a hurry! De tzeit is net gons uf--mer
hen ols noch pawr shtoond, un doh is der Rip Van Winkle selwer un ar con
des ding uf amohl settla.

_Omnes._ Der Rip Van Winkle!

_Herm._ Du, du, der Rip Van Winkle? Sell is unmiglich, unmiglich os mon
os shun tzwansich yohr dode is.----

_Rip._ Net exactly unmiglich. De fact is, ich consider awfongs, gor nix
unmiglich mit ’m Rip Van Winkle. Se sawga ich wær dode, awer ich bin uf
der mainung os se a wennich ferhootled sin derweaga. Anyhow, doh bin
ich--un ich denk yusht in tzeit for dich settla un hame shicka.

_Herm._ Wann ’s now wohr in os des der Rip Van Winkle is, don luss uns aw
wissa wo ar fershteckl’d war in all denna tzwansich yohr.

_Judge._ Well was sawgsht tzu sellam?

_Rip._ Ei all os ich wase derfu is des: Geshter owet bin ich evva nuf
in der Blowa Barrick, un dort war ’n set orrick coryose un looshtiche
karls, un ich bin mit ena g’suffa warra, un we ich den morya tzurick in
’s shteddle cooma bin hob ich ous g’foona os ich tzwansich yohr dode war.

_Herm._ Hærsht now selly shtory?

_Judge._ Of course, at is ’n olter loafer un ’n batreeger, un ich denk
mer besser shickt ’n in de jail--sell is der recht plotz for so karls.

_Gust._ Ward noch a wennich, Mister Judge. Ward bis ich si eaga kint un
si shweshter for de Court bring.

    [_Exit, R._

_Herm._ Wann ’s wohr wær os du der Rip Van Winkle bisht don bin ich sure
oc doch ebber doh um der waig wær os dich kenna date.

_Rip._ Ei be sure kenna se mich. Olly leit in der nochbershaft fum Blowa
Barrick kenna mich. [_All gather around him and shake their heads._] Nay,
nay, de leit ken ich net, un se kenna mich aw net! Geshter war kæ hoond
im shteddle os net g’shwensled hut we ich um der wæg war, awer heit du’n
se all on mich gowtza. Der Shneider is aw net doh. Wann ar doh wær bin
ich sure os ar mich kenna date. Un geshter war aw kæ klæ kint im shteddle
os mich net gakent hut, un fro war wann ich cooma bin, un se sin mer ols
uf ’s k’nee nuf gacroddled un hen sich ferweild mit meim bawrd, awer
now, wann se mich sana sin se fergelshtert un shpringa derfu! Is es don
so g’shwint os de leit ame fergessa! Nemond is um der wæg os der Rip Van
Winkle kent!

_Herm._ Sell is ’a fact, dich kenna de leit net!

_Rip._ Un husht aw fergessa we ich di lava g’safe’d hob sellamohls we’d
in der meel dom g’falla bisht?

_Herm._ Wass! Ei----we----

_Rip._ Be sure husht ’s fergessa. Es is der gabrauch sheins os mer all so
saucha fergest.

_Herm._ (_Aside._) Wann ’s om end now een is! [_Aloud._] Well, now,
Judge, ich demand my rechta, un ich bin now entitled tzu judgment!

_Judge._ Halt a wennich. Wann ’s wohr is os du der Rip Van Winkle bisht,
don setsht aw ’n bobbeer hawa we des doh--’n copy derfu. Now, husht so ’n
bobbeer?

_Rip._ Bobbeer! Ich wase ’s net. Der Shquire Van Slaus hut mer geshter
owet ’n bobbeer gevva un ich hob ’s doh in my inwendicher jacket sock ni
g’shteckd--awra ich denk ich hob ’s ferlora. (_Feeling for it._) Nay,
nay, doh is ’s--des is ’s very same bobbeer. [_Gives it to the JUDGE, who
reads it._

_Judge._ Yaw es is so--des is der Rip Van Winkle, des bobbeer doh prooft
’s. [_All gather round and shake hands with him._

_Rip._ Un now kenna se mich widder! Mer set doch now net maina os ’s si
kent!

_Herm._ Der Rip Van Winkle levendich! Don bin ich ous g’shpeeld, uf
g’used un obgawickled!

_Gust._ [_Without._] Mauch plotz boova, mer cooma--’s kint will nochamohl
dawdy sana!

    _Enter GUSTAFFE, with LORRENNA, ALICE and KNICKERBOCKER._

_Lor._ Oh my dawdy--my gooter olter dawdy!

    [_Embraces RIP._

_Rip._ Bisht du now my duchter? Luss mich dich now amohl recht aw gooka!
Ha, ha, doh will ich awer aw de krenk krega wann du net g’woxa bisht
sidder os ich dich ’s letsht mohl g’sana hob--yusht eb ich nuf in der
barrick gonga bin geshter owet! Awer now, wær is don des doh?

_Alice._ Ei, bruder!

_Rip._ Alice, by jinks, geb mer de hond! [_Shakes cordially._] Un wær is
des?

_Alice._ Des? Des is der Knickerbocker, my mon.

_Rip._ Ei Knick, is sell miglich? [_Shakes hands._] De Alice is so grose
un so dick os we ’n booter fos--un awer wo is don my klanes boovelly?

_Knick._ Ar is aw um der waig--doh coom’d er?

    _Enter RIP VAN WINKLE, JR., R. 1 E._

_Rip._ Un is des doh now ’s bubbaly? Coom, Rippy, du shmarts hoondly--ich
bin di dawdy! Des beat now olles--du’t ’s now net?

_Knick._ Awer now sawg uns, Rip, wo der bettle warsht all de letshty
tzwansich yohr? Geb uns now all de particulars fun dina travels.

_Rip._ Ich will, ich will--ich sawg eich now olles os ich wase un sell
is os ich evva now doh bin--war de gons letsht naucht im barrick un hob
a while g’shlofa, un we ich den morya rooner cooma bin ins shteddle is
mer ’s fore cooma os olles ferennert wær un os de leit im sin hetta
all tzurick tzu gæ uf mich. Un sell is now olles os ich wase, un now,
luss uns amohl de drinks nemma mitnonner, uh doh gaits for uns all tzum
deifel, for de ladies un de gentlemenner un de boova un de maid un all de
fomelias un g’sundheit un long’s lava.


THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pennsylvania Dutch Rip Van Winkle, by 
Edward H. Rauch

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PENNSYLVANIA DUTCH RIP VAN WINKLE ***

***** This file should be named 55888-0.txt or 55888-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/8/8/55888/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

