The Project Gutenberg EBook of Charlie Codman's Cruise, by Horatio Alger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Charlie Codman's Cruise
       A Story for Boys

Author: Horatio Alger

Release Date: March 7, 2017 [EBook #54294]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLIE CODMAN'S CRUISE ***




Produced by Nahum Maso i Carcases and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






                         Transcriber's Notes:

  Obvious punctuation errors and misprints have been corrected.

  Blank pages present in the printed original have been deleted in
  the e-text version.

  Text in Italics is indicated between _underscores_

  Text in small capitals has been replaced by regular uppercase text.

                   *       *       *       *       *




                        CHARLIE CODMAN'S CRUISE

                           A Story for Boys


                         BY HORATIO ALGER, JR.

            AUTHOR OF "FRANK'S CAMPAIGN," "ERIE TRAIN BOY,"
                   "ADRIFT IN NEW YORK," ETC., ETC.


                               NEW YORK
                            HURST & COMPANY
                              PUBLISHERS




                               PREFACE.


In deference to the expressed wishes of some of his young friends,
the author has essayed a story of the sea, and now presents "Charlie
Codman's Cruise," as the third volume of the Campaign Series. It will
be found more adventurous than its predecessors, and the trials which
Charlie is called upon to encounter are of a severer character than
befell Frank Frost or Paul Prescott. But it will be found that they
were met with the same manly spirit, and a like determination to be
faithful to duty at all hazards.

Though not wholly a stranger to the sea, the author is quite aware of
the blunders to which a landsman is exposed in treating of matters and
a mode of life which, at the best, he must comprehend but imperfectly,
and has endeavored to avoid, as far as possible, professional
technicalities, as not essential to the interest of the story.

With these few words he submits the present volume to his young
readers, hoping for it a welcome even more generous than has been
accorded to "Frank's Campaign" and "Paul Prescott's Charge."




                       CHARLIE CODMAN'S CRUISE.




                                  I.

                        CHARLIE AND THE MISER.


Charlie Codman turned out of Washington into Bedford Street just as the
clock in the Old South steeple struck two. He was about fourteen, a
handsome, well-made boy, with a bright eye and a manly expression. But
he was poor. That was evident enough from his clothes, which, though
neat and free from dust, were patched in several places. He had a small
roll of daily papers under his arm, the remains of his stock in trade,
which he had been unable wholly to dispose of.

Some of my readers may know that the Latin School and English High
School are kept in the same building. At two o'clock both are
dismissed. Charlie had scarcely passed the school-house when a crowd
of boys issued from the school-yard, and he heard his name called from
behind. Looking back he recognized a boy somewhat smaller than himself,
with whom he had formed an acquaintance some time before.

"Where are you bound, Charlie?" asked Edwin Banks.

"I'm going home now."

"What luck have you had this morning?"

"Not much. I've got four papers left over, and that will take away
about all my profits."

"What a pity you are poor, Charlie. I wish you could come to school
with us."

"So do I, Eddie. I'd give a good deal to get an education, but I feel
that I ought to help mother."

"Why won't you come some time, and see us, Charlie? Clare and myself
would be very glad to see you at any time."

"I should like to go," said Charlie, "but I don't look fit."

"Oh, never mind about your clothes. I like you just as well as if you
were dressed in style."

"Perhaps I'll come some time," said Charlie. "I'd invite you to come
and see me, but we live in a poor place."

"Just as if I should care for that. I will come whenever I get an
invitation."

"Then come next Saturday afternoon. I will be waiting for you as you
come out of school."

Charlie little thought where he would be when Saturday came.

Shortly after the boys separated, and Charlie's attention was arrested
by the sight of an old man with a shambling gait, who was bending
over and anxiously searching for something on the sidewalk. Charlie
recognized him at once as "old Manson, the miser," for this was the
name by which he generally went.

Old Peter Manson was not more than fifty-five, but he looked from
fifteen to twenty years older. If his body had been properly cared
for, it would have been different; but, one by one, its functions had
been blunted and destroyed, and it had become old and out of repair.
Peter's face was ploughed with wrinkles. His cheeks were thin, and the
skin was yellow and hung in folds. His beard appeared to have received
little or no attention for a week, at least, and was now stiff and
bristling.

The miser's dress was not very well fitted to his form. It was in
the fashion of twenty years before. Grayish pantaloons, patched in
divers places with dark cloth by an unskilful hand; a vest from which
the buttons had long since departed, and which was looped together
by pieces of string, but not closely enough to conceal a dirty and
tattered shirt beneath; a coat in the last stages of shabbiness; while
over all hung a faded blue cloak, which Peter wore in all weathers. In
the sultriest days of August he might have been seen trudging along in
this old mantle, which did him the good service of hiding a multitude
of holes and patches, while in January he went no warmer clad. There
were some who wondered how he could stand the bitter cold of winter
with no more adequate covering; but if Peter's body was as tough as
his conscience, there was no fear of his suffering.

Charlie paused a moment to see what it was that the old man was hunting
for.

"Have you lost anything?" he asked.

"Yes," said Peter, in quavering accents. "See if you can't find it,
that's a good boy. Your eyes are better than mine."

"What is it?"

"It is some money, and I--I'm so poor, I can't afford to lose it."

"How much was it?"

"It wasn't much, but I'm so poor I need it."

Charlie espied a cent, lying partially concealed by mud, just beside
the curb-stone. He picked it up.

"This isn't what you lost, is it?"

"Yes," said Peter, seizing it eagerly. "You're a good boy to find it. A
good boy!"

"Well," thought Charlie, wondering, as the old man hobbled off with his
recovered treasure, "I'd rather be poor than care so much for money as
that. People say old Peter's worth his thousands. I wonder whether it
is so."

Charlie little dreamed how much old Peter was likely to influence his
destiny, and how, at his instigation, before a week had passed over his
head, he would find himself in a very disagreeable situation.

We must follow Peter.

With his eyes fixed on the ground he shuffled along, making more rapid
progress than could have been expected. Occasionally he would stoop
down and pick up any little stray object which arrested his attention,
even to a crooked pin, which he thrust into his cloak, muttering as he
did so, "Save my buying any. I haven't had to buy any pins for more'n
ten years, and I don't mean to buy any more while I live. Ha! ha!
Folks are _so_ extravagant! They buy things they don't need, or that
they might pick up, if they'd only take the trouble to keep their eyes
open. 'Tisn't so with old Peter. He's too cunning for that. There goes
a young fellow dressed up in the fashion. What he's got on must have
cost nigh on to a hundred dollars. What dreadful extravagance! Ha!
ha! It hasn't cost old Peter twenty dollars for the last ten years. If
he had spent money as some do, he might have been in the poor-house by
this time. Ugh! ugh! it costs a dreadful sum to live. If we could only
come into the world with natural clothes, like cats, what a deal better
it would be. But it costs the most for food. Oh dear! what a dreadful
appetite I've got, and I _must_ eat. All the money spent for victuals
seem thrown away. I've a good mind, sometimes, to go to the poor-house,
where it wouldn't cost me anything. What a blessing it would be to eat,
if you could only get food for nothing!"

It is very clear that Peter would have been far better off, as far as
the comforts of life are concerned, in the city almshouse; but there
were some little obstacles in the way of his entering. For instance,
it would scarcely have been allowed a public pensioner to go round
quarterly to collect his rents,--a thing which Peter would hardly have
relinquished.

Reflections upon the cost of living brought to Peter's recollection
that he had nothing at home for supper. He accordingly stepped into a
baker's shop close at hand.

"Have you got any bread cheap?" he inquired of the baker.

"We intend to sell at moderate prices."

"What do you ask for those loaves?" said the old man, looking wistfully
at some fresh loaves piled upon the counter, which had been but a short
time out of the oven.

"Five cents apiece," said the baker. "I'll warrant you will find them
good. They are made of the best of flour."

"Isn't five cents rather dear?" queried Peter, his natural appetite
struggling with his avarice.

"Dear!" retorted the baker, opening his eyes in astonishment; "why, my
good sir, at what price do you expect to buy bread?"

"I've no doubt they're very good," said Peter, hastily; "but have you
any stale loaves? I guess they'll be better for me."

"Yes," said the baker, "I believe I have, but they're not as good as
the fresh bread."

"How do you sell your stale loaves?" inquired Peter, fumbling in his
pocket for some change.

"I sell them for about half price--three cents apiece."

"You may give me one, then; I guess it'll be better for me."

Even Peter was a little ashamed to acknowledge that it was the price
alone which influenced his choice.

The baker observed that, notwithstanding his decision, he continued to
look wistfully towards the fresh bread. Never having seen old Peter
before, he was unacquainted with his character, and judging from his
dilapidated appearance that he might be prevented, by actual poverty,
from buying the fresh bread, exclaimed with a sudden impulse: "You seem
to be poor. If you only want one loaf, I will for this once give you a
fresh loaf for three cents--the same price I ask for the stale bread."

"Will you?"

Old Peter's eyes sparkled with eagerness as he said this.

"Poor man!" thought the baker with mistaken compassion; "he must
indeed be needy, to be so pleased."

"Yes," he continued, "you shall have a loaf this once for three cents.
Shall I put it in a paper for you?"

Peter nodded.

Meanwhile he was busy fumbling in his pockets for the coins requisite
to purchase the loaf. He drew out three battered cents, and deposited
them with reluctant hand on the counter. He gazed at them wistfully
while the baker carelessly swept them with his hand into the till
behind the counter; and then with a sigh of resignation, at parting
with the coins, seized the loaf and shambled out into the street.

He put the bundle under his arm, and hastened up the street, his mouth
watering in anticipation of the feast which awaited him. Do not laugh,
reader,--little as you may regard a fresh loaf of bread, it was indeed
a treat to Peter, who was accustomed, from motives of economy, to
regale himself upon stale bread.

The baker was congratulating himself upon having done a charitable
action, when Peter came back in haste, pale with affright.

"I--I--," he stammered, "must have dropped some money. You haven't
picked up any, have you?"

"Not I!" said the baker, carelessly. "If you dropped it here you will
find it somewhere on the floor. Stay, I will assist you."

Peter seemed rather disconcerted than otherwise by this offer of
assistance, but could not reasonably interpose any objection.

After a very brief search Peter and the baker simultaneously discovered
the missing coin. The former pounced upon it, but not before the latter
had recognized it as a gold piece.

"Ho, ho!" thought he, in surprise, "my charity is not so well bestowed
as I thought. Do you have many such coins?" he asked, meaningly.

"I?" said Peter, hastily, "Oh no! I am very poor. This is all I have,
and I expect it will be gone soon,--it costs so much to live!"

"It'll never cost you much," thought the baker, watching the shabby
figure of the miser as he receded from the shop.




                                  II.

                         A MISER'S HOUSEHOLD.


Peter Manson owned a small house in an obscure street. It was a
weather-beaten tenement of wood, containing some six or eight rooms,
all of which, with one exception, were given over to dirt, cobwebs,
gloom, and desolation. Peter might readily have let the rooms which
he did not require for his own use, but so profound was his distrust
of human nature, that not even the prospect of receiving rent for
the empty rooms could overcome his apprehension of being robbed by
neighbors under the same roof. For Peter trusted not his money to banks
or railroads, but wanted to have it directly under his own eye or
within his reach. As for investing his gold in the luxuries of life,
or even in what were generally considered its absolute necessaries, we
have already seen that Peter was no such fool as that. A gold eagle
was worth ten times more to him than its equivalent in food or clothing.

With more than his usual alacrity, old Peter Manson, bearing under his
cloak the fresh loaf which he had just procured from the baker on such
advantageous terms, hastened to his not very inviting home.

Drawing from his pocket a large and rusty door-key, he applied it to
the door. It turned in the lock with a creaking sound, and the door
yielding to Peter's push he entered.

The room which he appropriated to his own use was in the second story.
It was a large room, of some eighteen feet square, and, as it is
hardly necessary to say, was not set off by expensive furniture. The
articles which came under this denomination were briefly these,--a
cherry table which was minus one leg, whose place had been supplied by
a broom handle fitted in its place; three hard wooden chairs of unknown
antiquity; an old wash-stand; a rusty stove which Peter had picked up
cheap at an auction, after finding that a stove burned out less fuel
than a fireplace; a few articles of crockery of different patterns,
some cracked and broken; a few tin dishes, such as Peter found
essential in his cooking; and a low truckle bedstead with a scanty
supply of bedclothes.

Into this desolate home Peter entered.

There was an ember or two left in the stove, which the old man
contrived, by hard blowing, to kindle into life. On these he placed a
few sticks, part of which he had picked up in the street early in the
morning, and soon there was a little show of fire, over which the miser
spread his hands greedily as if to monopolize what little heat might
proceed therefrom. He looked wistfully at the pile of wood remaining,
but prudence withheld him from putting on any more.

"Everything costs money," he muttered to himself. "Three times a day
I have to eat, and that costs a sight. Why couldn't we get along with
eating once a day? That would save two thirds. Then there's fire. That
costs money, too. Why isn't it always summer? Then we shouldn't need
any except to cook by. It seems a sin to throw away good, bright,
precious gold on what is going to be burnt up and float away in smoke.
One might almost as well throw it into the river at once. Ugh! only to
think of what it would cost if I couldn't pick up some sticks in the
street. There was a little girl picking up some this morning when I was
out. If it hadn't been for her, I should have got more. What business
had she to come there, I should like to know?"

"Ugh, ugh!"

The blaze was dying out, and Peter was obliged, against his will, to
put on a fresh supply of fuel.

By this time the miser's appetite began to assert itself, and rising
from his crouching position over the fire he walked to the table on
which he had deposited his loaf of bread. With an old jack-knife he
carefully cut the loaf into two equal parts. One of these he put back
into the closet. From the same place he also brought out a sausage, and
placing it over the fire contrived to cook it after a fashion. Taking
it off he placed it on a plate, and seated himself on a chair by the
table.

It was long since the old man, accustomed to stale bread,--because
he found it cheaper,--had tasted anything so delicious. No alderman
ever smacked his lips over the most exquisite turtle soup with greater
relish than Peter Manson over his banquet.

"It is very good," he muttered, with a sigh of satisfaction. "I don't
fare so well every day. If it hadn't been for that unlucky piece of
gold, perhaps the baker would have let me had another loaf at the same
price."

He soon despatched the half loaf which he allotted to his evening meal.

"I think I could eat the other half," he said, with unsatisfied hunger;
"but I must save that for breakfast. It is hurtful to eat too much.
Besides, here is my sausage."

The sausage was rather burned than cooked, but Peter was neither nice
nor fastidious. He did not eat the whole of the sausage, however, but
reserved one half of this, too, for breakfast, though it proved so
acceptable to his palate that he came near yielding to the temptation
of eating the whole. But prudence, or rather avarice, prevailed, and
shaking his head with renewed determination, he carried it to the
closet and placed it on the shelf.

Between seven and eight o'clock Peter prepared to go to bed, partly
because this would enable him to dispense with a fire, the cost
of which he considered so ruinous. He had but just commenced his
preparations for bed when a loud knock was heard at the street door.

At the first sound of the knocking Peter Manson started in affright.
Such a thing had not occurred in his experience for years.

"It's some drunken fellow," thought Peter. "He's mistaken the house.
I'll blow out the candle, and then he'll think there's nobody here."

He listened again, in hopes to hear the receding steps of the visitor,
but in vain. After a brief interval there came another knock, louder
and more imperative than the first.

Peter began to feel a little uneasy.

"Why don't he go?" he muttered, peevishly. "He can't have anything to
do with me. Nobody ever comes here. He's mistaken the house."

His reflections were here interrupted by a volley of knocks, each
apparently louder than the last.

"Oh dear, what shall I do?" exclaimed the miser with a ludicrous mixture
of terror and perplexity. "It's some desperate ruffian, I know it is. I
wish the police would come. I shall be robbed and murdered."

Peter went to the window and put his head out, hoping to discover
something of his troublesome visitor. The noise of opening the window
attracted his attention.

"Hilloa!" he shouted. "I thought I'd make you hear some time or other.
I began to think you were as deaf as a post, or else had kicked the
bucket."

"Who's there?" asked Peter, in a quavering voice.

"Who's there! Come down and see, and don't leave a fellow to hammer
away all night at your old rat-trap. Come down, and open the door."

"This ain't the house," said Peter. "You've made a mistake. Nobody ever
comes here."

"No more I should think they would, if you always keep 'em waiting as
long as you have me. Come along down, and let me in."

"But I tell you," persisted Peter, who didn't at all like the visitor's
manners, "that you've made a mistake. This ain't the house."

"Ain't what house, I'd like to know?"

"It ain't the house you think it is," said the old man, a little
puzzled by this question.

"And what house do I think it is? Tell me that, you old----"

Probably the sentence would have been finished in a manner
uncomplimentary to Peter, but perhaps, from motives of policy, the
stranger suppressed what he had intended to say.

"I don't know," returned Peter, at a loss for a reply, "but there's a
mistake somewhere. Nobody comes to see me."

"I shouldn't think they would," muttered the outsider, "but every rule
has its exceptions, and somebody's come to see you now."

"You've mistaken the person."

"No, I haven't. Little chance of making a mistake. You're old Peter
Manson."

"He _has_ come to see me," thought Peter, uneasily; "but it cannot be
for any good end. I won't let him in; no, I won't let him in."

"Well what are you going to do about it?" asked his would-be visitor,
impatiently.

"It's too late to see you to-night."

"Fiddlestick!" retorted the other. "It isn't eight yet."

"I'm just going to bed," added Peter, becoming momentarily more uneasy
at the man's obstinacy.

"Going to bed at half past seven! Come, now, that's all a joke. You
don't take me for a fool!"

"But I am," urged Peter, "I always do. I'm very poor, and can't afford
to keep a fire and light going all the evening."

"You poor! Well, may be you are. But that ain't neither here nor there.
I have got some important business to see you about, and you must let
me in."

"Come to-morrow."

"It's no use; I must see you to-night. So just come down and let me in,
or it'll be the worse for you."

"What a dreadful ruffian!" groaned Peter; "I wish the watch would come
along, but it never does when it's wanted. Go away, good man," he said,
in a wheedling tone. "Go away, and come again to-morrow."

"I tell you I won't go away. I must see you to-night."

Convinced that the man was not to be denied, Peter, groaning with fear,
went down, and reluctantly drawing the bolt, admitted the visitor.




                                 III.

                        THE UNWELCOME VISITOR.


Opening the door with trembling hand Peter Manson saw before him a
stout man of forty-five, with a complexion bronzed by exposure to the
elements.

Short and thick-set, with a half-defiant expression, as if, to use a
common phrase, he "feared neither man nor devil," a glance at him
served hardly to reassure the apprehensive old man.

The stranger was attired in a suit of coarse clothing, and appeared to
possess little education or refinement. He might be a sailor,--there
was an indefinable something about him,--a certain air of the sea, that
justified the suspicion that he had passed some part of his life, at
least, in the realms of Father Neptune.

Peter Manson, holding in his hand the fragment of candle which
flickered wildly from the sudden gust of wind which rushed in at the
door just opened, stood in silent apprehension, gazing uneasily at his
unwelcome visitor.

"Well, shipmate," said the latter, impatiently, "how long are you going
to stand staring at me? It makes me feel bashful, not to speak of its
not being over and above civil."

"What do you want?" inquired Peter, his alarm a little increased by
this speech, making, at the same time, a motion as if to close the
door.

"First and foremost, I should like to be invited in somewhere, where
it isn't quite so public as at the street door. My business is of a
private nature."

"I don't know you," said the miser, uneasily.

"Well, what's the odds if I know you?" was the careless reply. "Come,
push ahead. Where do you live? Up stairs, or down stairs? I want to
have a little private talk with you somewhere."

The speaker was about to cross the threshold when Peter stepped in
front, as if to intercept him, and said, hurriedly, "Don't come in
to-night; to-morrow will do just as well."

"By your leave," said the visitor, coolly, pushing his way in, in spite
of the old man's feeble opposition. "I have already told you that I
wanted to see you to-night. Didn't you hear me?"

"Thieves!" the old man half ejaculated, but was checked by the other
somewhat sternly.

"No, old man, I am not a thief; but if you don't have done with your
stupid charges, I may be tempted to verify your good opinion by trying
my hand at a little robbery. Now lead the way to your den, wherever it
is, if you know what is best for yourself."

The outer door was already closed, and Peter felt that he was at the
intruder's mercy. Nevertheless, there was something in this last
speech, rough and imperative as it was, that gave him a little feeling
of security, so far as he had been led to suspect any designs on his
property on the part of his companion.

Without venturing upon any further remonstrance, which, it was clear,
would prove altogether useless, he shuffled up stairs, in obedience to
the stranger's command, yet not without casting back over his shoulder
a look of apprehension, as if he feared an attack from behind.

His visitor, perceiving this, smiled, as if amused at old Peter's
evident alarm.

Arrived at the head of the stairs, Peter opened the door into the
apartment appropriated to his own use.

The stranger followed him in, and after a leisurely glance about the
room, seated himself with some caution in a chair, which did not look
very secure.

Peter placed the flickering candle upon the mantel-piece, and seated
himself.

It was long, very long, since a visitor had wakened the echoes of the
old house; very long since any human being, save Peter himself, had
been seated in that room. The old man could not help feeling it to be a
strange thing, so unaccustomed was he to the sight of any other human
face there.

"It seems to me," said his visitor, dryly, taking in at a glance all
the appointments of the room, "that you don't care much about the
luxuries of life."

"I," said Peter, "I'm obliged to live very plain,--very plain,
indeed,--because I am so poor."

"Poor or not," said the visitor, "you must afford to have a better fire
while I am here. I don't approve of freezing."

He rose without ceremony, and taking half a dozen sticks from the
hearth, deposited them in the stove, which now contained only some
burning embers.

"Stay," said Peter, hastily. "Don't put so much on; it's wasteful, and
I sha'n't have any left for to-morrow."

"I'll risk that," said the other, carelessly. "At any rate, it's better
to be comfortable one day than to shiver through two."

The flame caught the wood, which soon blazed up, diffusing an unusually
cheerful glow over the apartment. Peter, in spite of the dismay with
which he had at first contemplated the sudden movement on the part
of his visitor, and the awful consumption of wood which he knew must
ensue, nevertheless appeared to enjoy the increased heat. He drew his
chair nearer the stove, and an expression of satisfaction was visible
in his face as he spread out both hands to catch a little warmth.

"There, Peter," said the stranger, "I knew you'd like it after it was
fairly done. Isn't it worth while to have a good warm fire?"

"If it didn't cost so much," groaned Peter, the one thought intruding.

"Hush, Peter; if what people say be true, and as I am inclined to
believe, there's no one better able to afford a good fire than you."

"No one better able!" repeated Peter, at once taking alarm, and lifting
up both hands in earnest deprecation, "when I can hardly get enough
together to keep from absolute starvation. Oh, it's a strange world,
it's a strange world!"

"Well, Peter, some strange people do live in it, to be sure. But people
do say, Peter, that you have a power of money hidden away in this old
house somewhere."

Peter started to his feet in affright, then feeling that his movement
might lead to suspicion, sank back into his seat, saying, uneasily, "I
only wish it were true. People say such strange things. But it's only
idle talk, idle talk. They know better."

"You'd be very grateful, I have no doubt, to anybody that would show
you where all these treasures are that people talk about, wouldn't you,
hey?"

"Ye--Yes," answered Peter Manson, who did not know quite how to
understand his companion, whose tone seemed to have a hidden meaning
which made him uneasy.

"And will you give me leave to search the house, if I will promise to
give you half the gold I find?"

"But you wouldn't find any," answered the miser, hastily.

"Then there would be no harm done. Suppose now I should remove the
flooring, just here for instance, don't you think I might possibly find
something underneath that would repay me for my search?"

Unconsciously the speaker had hit upon one of Peter's places of
deposit. Directly under where he was seated there was a box of gold
coins. Accordingly this remark, which seemed to indicate to Peter some
knowledge of his hiding-place, filled him with fearful apprehensions.

"No, no," said he, vehemently; "go away, there isn't any there. If that
is all you have got to say, go away and leave me to my rest. I ought to
be in bed; it is getting late."

"I _have_ something more to say, Peter Manson," returned his companion.
"If I had not, I should not have sought you to-night. What I have to
say is of great importance to you as you will find. Will you hear it?"

"Go on," muttered Peter, his attention arrested, in spite of his fears,
by the stranger's peculiar tone.

"First, then, let me tell you a story. It may be real, it may be only
fancy. I won't say anything about that. By the way, Peter, were you
ever in the West Indies?"

This question produced a singular effect upon Peter, considering
its apparently unimportant character. He started, turned as pale as
his ghastly complexion permitted, fixed an anxious glance upon the
stranger, who looked as if nothing particular had happened, and said
hastily, "No, I was never there. What made you ask?"

"Nothing particular," said the other, carelessly; "if you were never
there, no matter. Only it is there that what I am going to tell you
happened. But to my story.

"Some twenty years ago there lived in the city of Havana an American
gentleman, no matter about his name, who had established himself in
business in the city. He had married before he went there, and had a
daughter about sixteen years of age. Well, his business flourished.
Good luck seemed to attend him in all his ventures, and he seemed
likely to accumulate enough to retire upon before many years."

Peter started, and as the story progressed seemed to be internally
agitated. A keen glance satisfied his visitor of this; without
appearing to notice it, however, he went on,--

"But things don't always turn out as well as we expect. Just when
things looked brightest there came a sudden blow, for which the
merchant was unprepared. On going to his counting-room one morning, he
discovered that his book-keeper had disappeared, and what was worse,
had carried off with him the sum of twenty thousand dollars--a large
sum, was it not?"

"What is all this to me?" demanded Peter, with sudden fierceness.

"I will tell you by and by," said the stranger, coolly.

"I will take the liberty to put a little more wood into the stove, and
then go on with my story."

"I--I'll put some in," said Peter.

He took a small stick about half as large round as his wrist, and
opening the stove-door, put it in.

"That'll do to begin with," said the stranger, following it, to Peter's
dismay, with half a dozen larger ones. "Now we'll be comfortable."




                                  IV.

                         A STARTLING QUESTION.


While Peter's uneasiness became every moment more marked, his visitor
continued,--

"This sad defalcation was the more unfortunate because, on that very
day notes to a heavy amount became due. Of course the merchant was
unable to pay them. Do you know what was the result?"

"How should I know?" asked Peter, testily, avoiding the gaze of the
stranger, and fixing his eyes uneasily upon the fire.

"Of course you couldn't know, I was foolish to think such a thing."

"Then what made you think it?" said Peter, in a petulant tone. "I don't
care to hear your story. What has it got to do with me?"

"Don't be in too much of a hurry, and perhaps you will learn quite as
soon as you care to. The same result followed, which always does follow
when a business man cannot meet his engagements. He failed."

Peter stirred uneasily, but said nothing.

"His character for integrity was such that there were many who would
have lent him a helping hand, and carried him safely through his
troubles; but he was overwhelmed by the blow, and sank under it.
Refusing all offers of assistance, he took to his bed, and some six
months after died."

"And what became of his daughter?" asked Peter, showing a little
curiosity for the first time.

"Ha! you seem to be getting interested," exclaimed the other, fixing
his keen eyes upon Peter, who seemed confused. "His daughter was
beautiful and had already won the heart of a young American, who had
little money but a handsome figure and good business habits."

"Did she marry this young Codman?"

"Who told you his name was Codman?" asked Peter's visitor, watching him
keenly.

"I--I thought you did," stammered the miser, disconcerted.

"You are mistaken. I have mentioned no name."

"Then I--I must have misunderstood you."

"I dare say," said the other, ironically. "However, we won't dispute
that point. Well, this young Codman,--for singularly enough you hit
upon the right name, not knowing anything of the circumstances of
course,--this young Codman married Isabel."

"Isabel!" repeated the old man. "Her name was----"

Here he paused in sudden confusion, feeling that he was betraying
himself by his incautious correction.

"Yes, Peter," said the other with a shrewd smile, "you are right. Her
name was not Isabel, but Eleanor. I acknowledge that I was wrong; but
it seems to me that, for one who is entirely a stranger to the events I
have been describing, you show a wonderful shrewdness in detecting my
mistakes."

Peter maintained a confused silence, and wriggled about uneasily, as if
the stranger's fixed and watchful gaze disturbed him.

"Humph! well they say that some people have the gift of second sight,
and others can see through millstones, and various other wonderful
things."

"What has all this to do with me?" asked Peter, crossly, for he felt it
necessary to make some demonstration. "It's getting late, and I want to
go to bed. Go away, and--and come again to-morrow, if you want to."

"A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush, Peter, which means that I
am sure of you now, and perhaps you wouldn't let me in if I should call
to-morrow. If you are sleepy I have no objection to your going to bed.
I can talk to you as well as if you were sitting up. I will stay here
and keep the fire going."

Peter looked at the small pile of wood with a groan, and muttered
something about "its being awful extravagant to keep such a fire."

"I believe," said the stranger, "I have not yet told you the name of
the defaulted clerk."

Peter said nothing.

"It was Thornton, but his first name was Peter, the same as yours.
Singular, isn't it, Peter?"

"I suppose there are a good many Peters in the world," muttered the old
man.

"Very likely; though I hope most of them are better than this Peter
Thornton. He got off without being taken, with the twenty thousand
dollars in his possession. He was fond of money, and many thought this
explained the defalcation. However, there were not wanting others who
assigned a different motive. It was said that he had been smitten by
the youthful charms of his employer's daughter Eleanor, who did not
favor his suit."

Peter shifted uneasily in his chair.

"No one could blame her. In fact it was perfectly preposterous for him
to think of mating with her. Did you speak?"

"No!" snarled Peter.

"I thought you said something. I repeat, that she had plenty of reasons
for rejecting him. She was just sixteen, and beautiful as she was
young, and had no lack of admirers ready to devote themselves to her.
As for Peter Thornton, ha! ha! he never could have been very handsome,
from all I have heard of him. In the first place, he was forty or more."

"Thirty-eight," muttered Peter, below his breath.

"And his features were irregular, besides being marked with the
small-pox, which he had had in early life. He had a long, hooked nose
like a bird's beak, an enormous mouth, little sharp gray eyes like a
ferret's, and his hair was already mingled with gray. On the whole, he
hadn't much beauty to boast of. Did you say anything?"

"No!" snarled Peter, sourly. He was sitting with his elbows on his
knees, and his face resting on his hands.

"Beg pardon, I thought you spoke. To add to Peter's charms of person,
his disposition was not the sweetest that ever was. He had a harsh
and crabbed manner, which would have led to his discharge if he had
not had one saving trait. I will say, to his credit, that he was a
capital book-keeper. Of his honesty his employer thought he was well
assured, and probably if nothing had occurred of a character to wound
Peter's pride, he might have continued faithful to his trust. One day,
however, Peter took an opportunity, when he had been calling at the
house of his employer on business connected with the counting-room,
to declare his love to the young lady, whom he found alone in the
drawing-room. You can imagine how much she was amused--why don't you
laugh, Peter? You look as glum as if it were _you_ that had met with
this disappointment. The young lady told him plainly, as soon as she
got over her astonishment, that she could give him no encouragement
whatever. Perhaps there might have been in her tone something of the
aversion which it was natural for her to feel at such a proposition
from one so much beneath her. If they had married, it would have been
a second case of Beauty and the Beast. Beg pardon, Peter, I believe you
said something."

"No!" snarled Peter, fiercely. "Have you got nearly through? Your story
is nothing to me--nothing, I say. I want to go to bed. You have kept me
up too late already."

"I can't help that, Peter. It took me too long to get in for me to
resign readily the pleasure of your society. I say, Peter, what a jolly
good fellow you are,--quite a lively companion,--only it strikes me you
might be a little more civil to your company. It isn't exactly polite
to keep telling one how anxious you are for him to go.

"As I was saying, when you interrupted me, Eleanor told Peter very
decidedly that she could not for an instant entertain his suit. He
endeavored to change her determination, being an ardent, impulsive
lover, and probably in her impatience she said something which
irritated her lover, who went off in a rage. After a while, however,
he was foolish enough to open the subject again. Of course she was
extremely annoyed at his persistence, and seeing no other way of
escaping the persecution, she felt it necessary to acquaint her father
with what had transpired. The merchant was naturally indignant at his
book-keeper's presumption, and calling him aside one morning threatened
to discharge him from his employment unless he should forthwith desist.
This was, of course, a great blow to Peter's pride. He had the good
sense to say nothing, however, but none the less determined within
himself to be revenged upon those who had scorned his advances, as
soon as an opportunity offered. I don't know as I blame him. Perhaps I
should have done the same under similar circumstances."

There was a trace of agitation upon the pale and wrinkled countenance
of the miser.

"This it was," continued the stranger, "taken in connection with
Peter's natural cupidity that led to the defalcation I have mentioned.
So far as the merchant was concerned his revenge was completely
successful, for he was the means of his ruin and premature death. And
now, Peter," he added, suddenly changing his tone, "can you tell me
what induced you to change your name from Thornton to Manson?"

"Me!" exclaimed the miser, starting to his feet in consternation, and
glaring wildly at the speaker.




                                  V.

                             THE COMPACT.


"Yes," said the stranger, composedly; "I repeat the question, why did
you change your name to Manson?"

"What--do--you--mean?" the old man faltered slowly.

"I mean just what I say, and I see you understand me well enough."

"You can't prove it," said Peter, with an uneasy glance at his
imperturbable companion.

"Can't I? Perhaps not. I should say the mysterious knowledge you seem
to possess of the main incidents in my story would prove something."

"That isn't evidence in a court of law," said Peter, regaining a degree
of confidence.

"Perhaps not; but I say, Peter, don't you recognize me?"

The old man scanned his features eagerly, and a sudden look of
remembrance satisfied the latter that he was not forgotten.

"I see you do remember me," he said; "I thought you hadn't forgotten
John Randall. At any rate he hasn't forgotten you, though twenty years
have passed, and I was then but a young man. I used to see you too
often about the streets of Havana not to remember that hooked nose,
those gray eyes, and (excuse my plainness of speech) that large mouth.
Yes, Peter, your features are impressed upon my memory too indelibly to
be effaced."

Peter Manson remembered his companion as one who had had the reputation
of being a "wild" young man. He had been placed at school by his father
without any profitable result. On his father's death he squandered,
in dissipation, the property which came to him, and had since devoted
himself to the sea.

"Having settled this little matter of your identity," continued
Randall, "I am ready to finish my story. I told you that Eleanor
married the young man whose name you remembered so well. He was poor,
dependent upon his salary as a clerk, and thanks to you his wife had
nothing to hope from her father. They were obliged to live in a very
humble way. At length, thinking he could do better here, he removed to
Boston, where his early life had been spent."

"To Boston!" muttered Peter.

"The removal took place some six years since. They had three children
when they first came here, but two died, leaving only the second, a
boy, named Charlie. I should think he might be fourteen years of age.
And now, would you like to know if the husband is still living?"

"Is he?" asked Peter, looking up.

"No. He died about a year since, of a fever."

"And--and Eleanor? What of her?"

"For six months past she has been a tenant of yours."

"A tenant of mine!" exclaimed the miser.

"It is even so. She occupies a second-story room in the tenement-house
in----Street."

"And I have met her face to face?"

"I dare say you have. Your tenants are pretty sure to have that
pleasure once a month. But doesn't it seem strange that Eleanor Gray,
the beautiful daughter of your Havana employer, should after these
twenty years turn up in Boston the tenant of her father's book-keeper?"

"Ha! ha!" chuckled the miser, hoarsely, "she isn't so much better off
than if she had married old Peter."

"As to being better off," said Randall, "I presume she is better off,
though she can't call a hundred dollars her own, than if she were
installed mistress of your establishment. Faugh! Poorly as she is
obliged to live, it is luxury, compared with your establishment."

He glanced about him with a look of disgust.

"If you don't like it," said Peter, querulously, "there is no use of
your staying. It is past my bedtime."

"I shall leave you in a few minutes, Peter, but I want to give you
something to think of first. Don't you see that your property is in
danger of slipping from your hands?"

"My property in danger!" exclaimed Peter, wildly; "what do you mean;
where is the danger?" Then, his voice sinking to its usual whine,--"not
that I have any of any consequence, I am poor--very poor."

"Only from what I see I could easily believe it, but I happen to know
better."

"Indeed, I am----"

"No more twaddle about poverty," said Randall, decidedly, "it won't go
down. I am not so easily deceived as you may imagine. I know perfectly
well that you are worth at the very least, thirty thousand dollars."

"Thirty thousand dollars!" exclaimed the miser, raising both hands in
astonishment.

"Yes, Peter, and I don't know but I may say forty thousand. Why, it
can't be otherwise, with your habits. Twenty years ago you made off
with twenty thousand, which has been accumulating ever since. Your
personal expenses haven't made very large inroads upon your income,
judging from your scarecrow appearance. So much the worse for you. You
might have got some good from it. Now it must go to others."

"To others!" exclaimed Peter, turning pale.

"Certainly. You don't think the law gives you whatever you've a mind
to steal, do you? Of course there is no doubt that to your tenants,
Eleanor and Charlie Codman, belongs this property which you wrongfully
hold."

"They sha'n't have it. They never shall have it," said Peter Manson,
hastily.

"Well, perhaps the law may have something to say about that."

"My gold!" groaned the miser. "If I lose that I lose everything. It
will be my death. Good Mr. Randall, have pity upon me. I am sure you
won't say anything that----"

"Will bring you to state's prison," said Randall, coolly.

"They--Eleanor and her son--need never know it."

"Unless I tell them."

"But you won't."

"That depends upon circumstances. How much will you give me to keep
the thing secret?"

"What will I give you?"

"Precisely. That is what I have been so long in coming at. You see,
Peter, that the secret is worth something. Either I reveal it to the
parties interested, in which case I wouldn't give that," snapping his
fingers, "for your chance of retaining the property, or I keep silence
_if you make it worth my while_."

"Pity me," said the miser, abjectly, sinking on his knees before
Randall; "pity me and spare my gold."

"Pity you!" said Randall, contemptuously. "Why didn't you pity your
employer? You must make up your mind to pay me my price."

"I am very poor," whined Peter, in his customary phrase, "and I can't
pay much."

"Oh yes, Peter," said the other, sarcastically, "I am well aware that
you are poor,--wretchedly poor,--and I won't be too hard upon you."

"Thank you--thank you," said Peter, catching at this promise; "I will
give you something--a little----"

"How much?" asked Randall, with some curiosity.

"Ten dollars!" said the miser, with the air of a man who named a large
sum.

"Ten dollars!" returned Randall, with a laugh of derision. "Ten dollars
to secure the peaceable possession of thirty thousand! Old man, you
must be mad, or you must think that I am."

"I--I did not mean to offend," said the old man, humbly. "If I double
the sum will it satisfy you? I--I will try to raise it, though it will
be hard--very hard."

"This is mere trifling, Peter Manson," said his visitor, decidedly.
"Twenty dollars! Why I wouldn't have come across the street to get it.
No, you will have to elevate your ideas considerably."

"How much do you demand?" said the miser, groaning internally, and
fixing his eyes anxiously upon Randall.

"You must not make a fuss when I name the amount."

"Name it," said Peter, in a choking voice.

"One thousand dollars will purchase my silence, and not a dollar less."

Peter sprang from his seat in consternation.

"One thousand dollars! Surely you are not in earnest."

"But I am, though. This is not a subject I care to jest upon."

"One thousand dollars! It will take all I have and leave me a beggar."

"If it should, Peter," said his visitor, composedly, "I will procure
you admission to the poor-house, where, if I am not much mistaken you
will be better off than in this tumble-down old shanty."

"Has the man no mercy?" groaned Peter, wringing his hands.

"None at all."

"Then," exclaimed the miser, in a sudden fit of desperation, "I won't
pay you a cent--not a single cent."

"That is your final determination, is it?"

"Ye--yes," muttered Peter, but less firmly.

"Very well. I will tell you the result. I shall at once go to Eleanor,
and inform her of the good fortune which awaits her. No fear but she
will pay me a thousand dollars for the intelligence."

"She has no money."

"I will furnish her with money for the lawyers--she can repay me out of
your hoards."

Peter groaned.

"Ay, groan away, Peter. You'll have cause enough to groan, by and by.
There is one thing you don't seem to consider, that the law will do
something more than take away your property. I will come to see you in
jail."

He rose to leave the room, but Peter called him back hastily. "We may
come to terms yet," he said.

"Then you accede to my terms."

"I will give you five hundred."

"Good-night, Peter. I wish you happy dreams."

"St-stay!" exclaimed Peter, terrified. "I will give eight hundred."

"I am in something of a hurry," said Randall. "I believe I will call
on Eleanor. I don't think we can make any arrangement."

"Hold! perhaps I will do as you say."

"Ah! now you are beginning to be reasonable," said Randall, resuming
his seat.

"What security can you give me for your silence?"

"I'll tell you what I will do, Peter. You remember I told you Eleanor
had a son, a boy of fourteen."

"Yes."

"His mother is quite devoted to him. Indeed, he contributes to her
support by selling papers, and by various little jobs. Now, as long as
Eleanor lives here you are in danger."

"Yes."

"And if a blow is levelled at her it must be through her boy."

"I see."

"Then I'll tell you of a scheme I have arranged. You must first
know that I am mate of a vessel now in port, which is bound for San
Francisco. We are to sail in a few days."

"Well?"

"We happen to be in want of a boy to fill up our regular number.
Suppose I kidnap Eleanor's boy. Don't you see, that as he is her
chief support, she will soon be in difficulties? and this, with her
uncertainty about her boy's fate, may rid you of your greatest peril,
and the only one of the two who could identify you."

"Excellent, excellent!" chuckled Peter, rubbing his hands; "she shall
yet be sorry that she rejected old Peter."

"Am I to understand that you accede to my proposal, then?"

Not without many groans Peter agreed to deliver the sum mentioned
between them, on condition that the boy was secured.

It was striking ten when Randall left the house. His face beamed with
exultation.

"I have done a good night's work," he said. "By working on the fears of
the old curmudgeon I have made sure of a thousand dollars. He will be
lucky if this is the last money I get out of him. He little thinks that
I, too, have a revenge to wreak. He is not the only one that has been
scornfully rejected by Eleanor Codman. Now to bed, and to-morrow shall
see my work commenced."




                                  VI.

                           CHARLIE AT HOME.


The tenement-house owned by Peter Manson was a three-story wooden
building, very much in need of paint. It was scarcely likely to be
pointed out by any one as one of the architectural ornaments of the
city. Years before it had fallen into Peter's hands at a small price,
and he had every year since realized from it in the way of rent a sum
equal to one half the purchase-money. No one who has lived in a city
can help knowing how much more proportionally the poor are compelled
to pay for their scanty and insufficient accommodations than the rich,
or those in moderate circumstances. No class of property is made to
pay a larger percentage than the wretched tenement-houses which seem
adapted to furnish as little accommodation as possible to those who are
compelled to occupy them.

The tenement-house in which Charlie and his mother lived was no better
than the average. It was the home of a large number of persons of
various occupations. Seamstresses, mechanics, washer-women, and many
others found a home under this one roof.

Mrs. Codman occupied a room on the third floor. As we enter the
room it is easy to see what a charm can be thrown around even the
humblest place by the presence of refinement and good taste. All the
appointments of the room, indeed, were of the cheapest description.
Probably the furniture did not exceed in cost that of the room
opposite. Yet there was a considerable difference in the appearance
of Mrs. Codman's room and that of Sally Price, who, if she had ever
possessed an organ of neatness, had lost it years ago.

The old-fashioned windows were washed as clean as water could make
them, so as to admit all the sunshine which could find its way over
the tall roof on the opposite side of the street. They were hung with
plain chintz curtains, separated in the middle and looped on either
side. The floor was quite clean as far as it could be seen. In the
centre was spread a floor-cloth some eight feet square, which relieved
its bareness. There was a small round table near the window, and a
small square work-table of no very costly material, in another part of
the room. On this was placed a rose-bush in a flower-pot. It had been
given to Charlie by an old gentleman who had taken a fancy to him. In
another quarter was a home-made lounge, the work of Charlie's hands. It
had originally been a wooden box, given him by a shopkeeper near by.
This box had been covered with calico stuffed with cotton, so that it
made quite a comfortable seat. It was used besides as a wood-box, its
legitimate province, but when the cover was closed it was nevertheless
a very respectable article of furniture. There were besides a few plain
wooden chairs, and a small rocking-chair for Mrs. Codman. Opening out
of the main room was a small bedroom, occupied by the mother, while
Charlie had a bed made up for him at night in the common sitting-room.

A few books--a very few--were piled upon the little table. They were
chiefly schoolbooks,--an arithmetic, a geography, and an atlas, over
which Charlie would generally spend a portion of every evening, and
occasionally a boy's book, lent him by his friend Edwin Bangs, who,
together with his brothers, had quite a large juvenile library.

Mrs. Codman is sitting by the window industriously engaged in
needle-work, and intent on accomplishing a certain amount before
nightfall. She was past thirty-five, yet, in spite of the trials which
have left their impress on her brow, she would readily be taken for
five years younger. She has drawn her chair to the window to make the
most of the rapidly fading daylight. As with swift fingers she plies
the glistening needle, and the sun touches her cheek with a beaming
glow, we can see that not only has she been beautiful, but is still so.

A hasty step is heard on the stairs, there is a stamping at the door,
and in rushes a bright, handsome boy, with rosy cheeks and dark hair.

The mother's face lights up with a bright smile as she turns to her
son, the only one she has left to love.

"You're a little later than usual, Charlie, are you not?"

"A little, mother. You see I didn't get a job till late, and then two
came together."

"What were they?"

"A gentleman wanted me to take his carpet-bag from the Maine depot, and
I had to carry it away up to Rutland Street."

"Did he go with you?"

"No; he had to go to his counting-room in State Street."

"Was he willing to trust you? Some boys might have made off with the
carpet-bag, and he would have never seen it again."

"He thought of that, but he said--and I think he's a real
gentleman--that he knew I was honest by my appearance, and he was
willing to trust me."

"Quite complimentary, Charlie. How much did he pay you for your
trouble?"

"Half a dollar."

"Then you have done a good deal better than I have. I have been
working all day, and shall not realize more than twenty-five cents for
my labor."

"I wish you didn't have to work at all, mother."

"Thank you, Charlie; but I dare say I am happier for having something
to do. I wish I could get better pay for my work. But you haven't told
me what the other errand was. You said you had two."

"Yes," said Charlie, "I had just got back from Rutland Street, and had
bought two or three evening papers which I was going to try to sell,
when a man came up to me, and after looking at me for a minute or
two, asked me if I would take a little walk with him. He said he was
a stranger in Boston, and didn't know his way about much. He asked me
if I had lived here long, and what my name was. He told me he would
pay me if I would go around with him, and point out some of the public
buildings. He told me he would pay me at the rate of twenty-five cents
an hour for my time. I told him I had one or two papers to dispose of."

"'Never mind about them,' said he, 'I will take them off your hands.'

"'But they are alike,' said I.

"'Never mind,' he answered; so he paid me the full price for two
Journals and two Transcripts, and off we went."

"What sort of a person was he?"

"He was a stout man, over forty, and looked to me like a sailor. I
shouldn't wonder if he was an officer of some ship."

"Did you like his looks?"

"Why," said Charlie, hesitatingly, "not exactly; not so much as I did
of the other gentleman. There was something about his eye which I
didn't like. Still he acted up to his agreement, and paid me all he
promised."

"How long were you together?"

"About an hour and a half. We walked round the Common and the Public
Garden, went into the State House and the Public Library. However, he
didn't seem to care much about them. He seemed to take more interest
in me, somehow, and asked me a good many questions; whether I had any
parents living, and how long I had lived in the city. When I told him
you were born in Havana, he said he used to live there himself."

"Indeed!" said Mrs. Codman.

"He also told me that he might like to have me go round with him
again, and told me to call to-morrow at the Quincy House, where he is
stopping. But, mother, isn't it most time for supper? Here, just let me
set the table, if you are busy."

"Very well, Charlie; I shall be glad to have you do so, as I am in a
hurry to finish my sewing."

In the evening Charlie read to his mother while she sewed. Neither of
them suspected that it was the last evening they would spend together
for several months.




                                 VII.

                            CAPTAIN BRACE.


Lying at one of the wharves was a ship of moderate size, evidently
fast getting ready for sea. The cargo had all been stowed away, and,
notwithstanding the confusion, it was easy even for a landsman to see
that the ship was about ready for departure.

The ship was the Bouncing Betsey, commanded by Captain Nathaniel Brace.
As to the peculiar name of the vessel, I can give no information
whether or not there was a real Bouncing Betsey after whom it was
named. The probability however is, that it was a purely ideal name, the
sound and alliterative character of which had commended it to the one
upon whom rested the selection of a name.

A few words now about Captain Brace, with whom we shall become better
acquainted by and by.

He was a short, stout, broad-shouldered man. He was no fresh-water
captain, but from the age of thirteen had been tossing about on the
ocean. It is my privilege to know many sea captains who do honor to
their calling, high-toned, gentlemanly, and intelligent men; not
learned in books, but possessing a wide range of general information.
I am sorry to say that Captain Brace was not a man of this class. He
had little education beyond what was required by his profession, and
was utterly lacking in refinement and courtesy. He was not an amiable
man, but rough, stormy, exacting, and dictatorial. The crew under his
command he looked upon as so many machines, whose duty it was to obey
him with scrupulous exactness, whatever might be the nature of his
requisitions. When he got into one of his fits of passion, he would
stamp and rave, kicking and striking this way and that with the most
reckless disregard of human lives and human feelings. In fact, he was
one of those pests of the merchant service, an unfeeling tyrant, who
did all in his power to degrade the profession which he had adopted,
and add to the hardships which lie in the path of the sailor.

The employers of Captain Brace were far from being aware of the
extent to which he carried the severity of his discipline; brutality,
indeed, would be the more appropriate word. They supposed him to be
a strict commander, who liked to preserve a proper subordination in
those under his command, and this they were disposed to commend rather
than to complain of, more especially as the captain was master of his
profession, and had usually made quick and profitable voyages. This, as
may be supposed, was enough to cover a great many defects in the eyes
of those whose pecuniary interest he subserved, even if the captain had
not been shrewd enough to conceal his more disagreeable traits when on
shore, under an affectation of bluff frankness.

There was a time when there were many captains in the service no better
than the one we have just sketched, but both in the naval and merchant
service there has undoubtedly been a great improvement within a few
years.

Without dwelling further on the personal characteristics of Captain
Brace, with whom we shall have abundant opportunity to become
acquainted, since we purpose going to sea with him on his approaching
voyage, we introduce him pacing the deck of his vessel with a short
black pipe in his mouth, on the very morning he intends to sail.

"Where is Mr. Randall? has he come on board?" he inquired, turning to
the second mate.

"No, sir; I have not seen him this morning," was the reply.

"When he comes on board tell him I wish to see him immediately."

"Very well, sir."

The captain went to his cabin, and about five minutes later the
individual after whom he inquired came aboard. We recognize in him an
old acquaintance; no other than the nocturnal visitor who excited such
fearful apprehensions in the mind of old Peter Manson the miser.

"Where is Captain Brace, Mr. Bigelow?" he inquired of the second mate.

"In the cabin, Mr. Randall. He wishes to see you."

"And I wish to see him, so we can suit each other's convenience. How
long since did he ask for me?"

"Only two or three minutes. He has just gone below."

"Then he hasn't had long to wait."

With these words he hastened to the cabin, where he found the captain
waiting for him.

The subject on which the captain wished to see his first mate was
purely of a professional and technical character, and will not be
likely to interest the reader, and so will be passed over.

When this preliminary matter was disposed of, Randall, with a little
hesitation, remarked: "I have a little favor to ask of you, Captain
Brace."

"Very well, sir; let me know what it is, and if I can conveniently
grant it I will."

"The boy who had engaged to go with us has backed out, having heard
some ridiculous stories about your severity and----"

The captain's brow grew dark with anger as he said:

"The young rascal! I should like to overhaul him! I'd show him what it
is to see service!"

There is very little doubt that the captain would have kept his word.

Randall took care not to inform his superior officer that he had
privately communicated to the mother of the boy intelligence of his
severity, not from any motives of humanity, but simply because his
going would have interfered with his own plans in respect to Charlie.

"We shall not have much time to hunt up a boy if we sail at three
o'clock," said the captain. "I don't see but we must go without one."

"I think I can supply you with one, Captain Brace."

"Ha! who is it?"

"It's a nephew of mine, and the favor I spoke of was that you should
take him in place of the boy we have missed of."

"Humph!" said the captain, "there is one objection I have to taking
relations of the officers. You are expected to be tender of them, and
not order them about as roughly as the rest."

"There won't be any trouble of that sort in this case, Captain Brace,
you may be very sure," said the mate. "Although the boy is my nephew I
don't feel any very extraordinary affection for him."

"I should think not," said the captain, with a grim smile, "from your
efforts to get him a place on board this ship. You're not any more
gentle with boys than I am."

"The fact is, Captain Brace," said Randall, with a smile which evinced
a thorough understanding of the captain's meaning; "the fact is, the
boy is unruly, and they can't do much for him at home, and I thought it
might be well for him to try a voyage or two, _for the benefit of his
health_!"

The mate smiled, and as it was such a joke as the captain could
appreciate, he smiled too.

"Very well, Mr. Randall; if such are your views I have no objection to
his coming on board."

"I had fears," continued the mate, "that his unruly temper would
interfere with his usefulness at home. I felt pretty sure we could soon
cure him of that."

"_Kill or cure_, that is my motto," said the captain.

"Sometimes both," thought Randall, remembering one boy in a previous
voyage who had languished and died under the cruel treatment he
experienced on board.

"Does the boy know he is to go with us?" inquired the captain.

"Bless you, no; not he! He'd make a fuss if he did."

"How do you intend to get him on board, then?"

"I shall invite him to come and see the vessel, and when he is down
below I can take care that he stays there till we are fairly at sea."

"A good plan. What is the youngster's name, Mr. Randall?"

"Jack Randall; named after me."

"Humph! hope he'll do credit to the name," said the captain, grimly. "I
leave in your hands all the steps necessary to securing him. Remember,
if you please, that we shall sail at three."

"I will be on board before that time, sir, and bring my nephew with me."

"Very well, sir."

Of course the reader has conjectured that the Jack Randall, the mate's
nephew, spoken of above, is no other than our young hero, Charlie
Codman.

Poor boy! little does he dream of the plot that is being formed against
him.




                                 VIII.

                            THE BLUE CHEST.


On leaving the Bouncing Betsey, Mr. John Randall, the estimable mate of
that vessel, bent his steps towards a shop devoted to sailors' clothing
ready-made, with a large variety of other articles such as seamen are
accustomed to require.

It was a shop of very good dimensions, but low studded and rather dark,
the windows, which were few, being in part covered up by articles hung
in front of them.

The proprietor of this establishment was Moses Mellen, a little Jew,
with a countenance clearly indicating his Israelitish descent. His
small black eyes sparkled with the greed of gain, and he had a long,
hooked nose like the beak of a bird, which would not have been
considered too small an appendage for a face of twice the size. He had
one qualification for a successful trader--he seldom or never forgot a
face which he had once seen.

Rubbing his hands with a great show of cordiality, and with his face
wreathed in smiles, the instant he espied Randall he hastened to meet
him.

"Delighted to see you, Mr. Randall," he exclaimed; "perhaps I ought to
say Captain Randall."

"Not yet."

"Ah well, that will come soon. I hope you have had a prosperous voyage."

"Tolerably so, Mr. Mellen."

"Have you just arrived in the city, or have you been here for some
time?"

"Three weeks only, and now I am off again. We sailors don't have a
chance to stop long on dry land, Mr. Mellen."

"Not if they are such capital sailors as my friend, Mr. Randall. But
where are you bound this time?"

"Probably to Valparaiso."

"Anywhere else?"

"Perhaps so. We may go to the Indies or Sandwich Islands before we
return."

"A long voyage,--you will need to be fitted out before you
start,--don't you want something in my line? I sha'n't want much profit
out of an old friend like you."

This, by the way, was what Moses said to pretty much all his customers.

"I shall want a few things. I will pick them out now."

"This way, then."

Randall followed the proprietor to the back of the store, where he
selected a variety of articles, which he ordered sent on board the
Bouncing Betsey immediately.

"Now," said the mate, after his own purchases were completed, "I shall
require a small outfit for a boy who is going out with us."

"If you had brought him with you we could have furnished him at short
order."

"There was one little difficulty in the way of my doing that."

"Eh?"

"He doesn't know he is going."

"Ah ha!" said the Jewish dealer, putting one scraggy finger to the side
of his nose with a knowing look; "that's it, is it?"

"I see you comprehend. Now tell me what shall we do about fitting him?"

"If I could only see him----"

"You could judge by your eye what would be likely to fit him. Is that
what you would say?"

"Precisely."

"And how long would you require to look at him?"

"Two minutes would answer."

"Very well; I will call with the boy in the course of an hour or two.
By the way, I shall want a small chest to put the articles in. You keep
them, of course?"

"A great variety."

"I dare say you will suit me. A very plain one will answer. Have your
bill made out for the other articles, and I will discharge it."

With a profusion of bows and thanks, the trader dismissed his customer.

The mate now betook himself to the hotel where he had engaged Charlie
to meet him at eleven o'clock. Charlie, who was always punctual to his
appointments, had already arrived, and was looking over a newspaper in
the reading-room.

"So you are on hand, my boy," said Randall, in a friendly manner.

"Yes, sir."

"I am glad to find you punctual. Are you ready to set out?"

"Yes, sir, quite ready."

Rather to keep up the boy's delusion as to his designs, Randall
suffered Charlie to guide him to one or two places of public interest,
with which he was already more familiar than his guide, and then
suddenly proposed that they should go down to the wharves.

"You must know, my lad," said he, "that I am a sailor."

"I thought so, sir."

"What made you think so?"

"I don't know, sir; but I can generally tell a sailor."

"Perhaps I haven't got my sea-legs off. However, as I was saying, I am
an officer on board a ship lying at the wharf, and I have just thought
of a bundle I want brought from the ship. If you will go with me and
fetch it, I will pay you at the same rate I promised you for going
about with me."

Of course Charlie had no objections. In fact, although he had been on
board ships at the wharf, he had never been in company with an officer,
and he thought it possible his companion might be willing to explain to
him the use of some parts which he did not yet understand. Accordingly
he gave a ready assent to the mate's proposition, and together they
took their way to Long Wharf, at which the ship was lying.

The shop kept by the Jew was, as a matter of convenience and policy,
located near the wharves. It was not a general clothing-store, but
specially designed to supply seamen with outfits.

"I have a little errand here," said Randall, pausing before the shop of
Moses Mellen.

"I can stop outside," said Charlie.

"You had better come in. You will see where we sailors get our
clothing."

Not suspecting any sinister design in this invitation, Charlie
accepted it without more ado, and followed Randall in. He looked about
him with some curiosity, not observing that he too was an object of
attention to the Jewish dealer, whose quick eye detected their entrance.

He went forward to meet Randall.

"You see the boy, do you?" asked the mate, in a low voice.

"Is that the one?"

"Yes. Do you think you will be able to fit him?"

"No doubt about it, though he is a little smaller than the boys we
usually fit out."

"Never mind if the clothes are a little large. He'll be sure to grow to
them, and a precise fit isn't quite so important on the quarter-deck as
it might be on Washington Street. We are not fashionable on board the
Betsey, Mr. Mellen."

The dealer laughed, showing some yellowish tusks, which were evidently
not supplied by the dentist.

"Have you made out my bill?"

"Here it is."

"While I am looking over it, will you pick out such clothes as the boy
will need?"

Darting a hasty glance at Charlie, to make sure of his size, the dealer
hurried to the rear of the shop, and commenced selecting articles which
he laid away in a small blue chest.

The task was soon completed, and again he came out to the front part of
the store.

"All ready!" he said, in a low voice to Randall.

"You have been quick. Here is the amount of your bill. As to the chest,
you may send it on board the Bouncing Betsey without any unnecessary
delay."

"It shall be done, Mr. Randall. Have you no further commands for us?"

"I believe not, to-day."

"You will remember our shop when you are round again?"

"I won't forget you."

"You needn't accompany me to the door, nor allude to my voyage," said
Randall, in a low voice, to the dealer. "Remember, I have _him_ with
me."

Moses winked in a manner which by no means improved the expression of
his not very agreeable features.

"Now, my lad," said Randall, "we'll go on board the vessel. Have you
ever been on board a ship?"

"Yes, sir, a good many times by myself, but I never had any one to tell
me the different parts."

"I'll promise, then," said the mate, in a tone whose significance was
lost upon our hero at the time, though he afterwards recalled it, "that
you shall know more about a vessel before you leave this one."

"I thank you," said Charlie, considering the offer a kind one.

They ascended the ladder and jumped upon the deck of the vessel, which,
though Charlie knew it not, was to be his home for many a weary day.




                                  IX.

                               ON BOARD.


At the close of the last chapter we had got our hero fairly on board
the Bouncing Betsey, on what he supposed to be a brief visit, but
which his companion had resolved should be far otherwise.

Randall did not at first undeceive his youthful attendant. He felt
that it would hardly be polite, as the ship was lying at the wharf
surrounded by other vessels, and the disturbance and vigorous
resistance which Charlie would be apt to make when told what was in
store for him might attract a degree of attention which might prove
fatal to his plans.

They had scarcely set their feet upon deck, when they encountered
Captain Brace.

The mate glanced significantly at the boy by his side, and carelessly
put his finger to his lips in token of silence, at the same time
saying, "A lad whom I have promised to initiate into some of the
mysteries of seamanship."

"He may find the knowledge useful to him some time," said the captain,
with a grim smile. "Do you think you should like going to sea, my lad?"

"No, sir," returned Charlie, promptly, "I don't think I should."

"Why not?"

"I should get tired of seeing the sea all the time."

"You would get used to it."

"I never should like it so well as the land. Besides, I should not like
to leave my mother."

"Well, my lad, if you should ever change your mind," said the captain,
with a wicked glance at Randall, "I hope you'll give me the first offer
of your services."

"Yes, sir," said our hero, thinking the captain very affable and
polite, though, to be sure, his appearance was hardly as prepossessing
as it might have been.

"The captain seems to be a very nice man," said he to Randall, after
that officer had left them.

"Oh, yes," answered Randall, dryly, "a very fine man the captain is.
I'm glad you like him."

"Have you been to sea a long time?" inquired Charlie.

"Yes, I have been ever since I was a boy."

"Do you like it?"

"Very much. It seems like home to me now. I shouldn't be willing to
live on land for any length of time."

"Did you begin very young?"

"I was about sixteen. How old are you?"

"Almost fourteen. I shall be fourteen next month."

"You are a very good size for your age."

"Yes," said Charlie, with boyish pride, drawing himself up to his full
height. Like most boys, he liked to be told he was large of his age.

"My father was quite a large man," added our young hero.

"I know it," muttered Randall to himself, as the handsome face and
manly form of the father rose before him. They were imprinted more
vividly upon his memory, because he felt that it was these very
advantages which had enabled his rival to succeed in winning the prize
for which he had vainly contended.

"Did you speak?" said Charlie, hearing indistinctly the words which his
companion muttered.

"No," said Randall, shortly. "But I promised to show you something
about the vessel. I suppose you know the names of the masts."

"Yes, sir."

"What do they call this?"

"This is the main-mast," answered Charlie, promptly, "and the others
are called the fore-mast and mizzen-mast."

"That is right; I suppose the masts seem high to you."

"Yes, very high," said Charlie, stretching his neck to enable him to
see the top.

"Then you don't think you should like to go aloft?" said Randall,
playing with him as a cat plays with a mouse.

"I don't believe I could. It would make me dizzy."

"You could do better than you think for, if you were obliged to."

"Perhaps I might," said Charlie, doubtfully. "Do the boys on board ship
have to go up there?"

"I had to when I was a boy."

"Wer'n't you afraid?"

"I suppose I was, but that didn't do any good,--I had to go."

"Wer'n't you afraid of losing your hold?"

"Yes, but it isn't often a boy loses his hold going up the first time.
He is so frightened that he clings to the ropes with a pretty tight
grip. But after he gets used to it--and it doesn't seem any worse
than going up stairs--he is apt to grow careless, and then there is
sometimes an accident."

"Then I suppose they fall on deck and are instantly killed," said
Charlie, shuddering.

"Not always, for when the ship is in progress it leans a good deal, so
that they are more likely to fall overboard."

"And get drowned!"

"Sometimes. They can't always keep up till assistance comes, especially
if they can't swim. Sometimes their fall is broken by the rigging, and
they manage to save themselves by catching hold."

They visited other parts of the ship, and Randall continued his
explanations. The sailors were all on board, at work in various ways.
They did not appear to notice the mate and his young companion when
they passed, but Charlie, chancing to look behind him, observed one
making a significant gesture to another, which evidently referred to
them.

Our young hero mentally thought this not very polite, but did not pay
much attention to it.

About this time a porter arrived from the clothing-store already
referred to, bringing a small blue chest.

"This is the ship Bouncing Betsey, isn't it?" he inquired.

"Yes," answered one of the sailors.

"I was told to bring this chest here, then."

"Who is it for?"

"Jack Randall."

"That's the mate, you lubber. Why don't you put a handle to his name?"

"No, it's for a boy."

"We haven't got any such boy aboard as I knows on."

"There ain't two ships of this name, are there?"

"Not as I ever heerd tell."

"Then this must be the ship. Where shall I stow this chest? I've got
tired of bringing it on my back."

"You'd better go and speak to the mate about it. There he stands.
Mayhap that's the boy the kit belongs to."

The porter walked forward.

"Does this belong to you?" he asked, laying down the chest.

"Yes."

"Then it wasn't for a boy?"

"Yes," answered the mate, carelessly. "It is for a nephew of mine who
is going with us this voyage."

"Is that the young gentleman?" asked the porter, pointing to Charlie.

"He thinks you're my nephew," said Randall, smiling. "A good joke,
isn't it?"

"This young gentleman is only looking about the ship a little," he
answered. "He don't think he should fancy going to sea."

"Beg pardon, I didn't know but he might be the one."

"Oh, no, certainly not."

"Shall I leave the chest here?"

"Yes, anywhere. No, you may carry it below. Here," summoning one of
the sailors, "Show this man where to put this chest."

"So your nephew is going to sea," said Charlie, with some curiosity.

"Yes."

"Does he think he shall like to go?"

"I don't believe he thinks much about it."

"How large a boy is he?"

"I should think he was about as large as you. Yes, come to think of it,
I don't believe there can be any difference between you."

The joke was a cruel one, as Charlie found to his cost, before long.

"Is he on board now?"

"I don't see him," said the mate, looking in the opposite direction
from where Charlie was standing. "But I think he will be on board very
soon. Were you ever dressed in sailor's clothes?"

"Never," said our hero.

"I wonder how you would look. You are just about my nephew's size. Have
you any objection to trying on his clothes?"

Charlie had not. In fact he was rather curious to learn how he should
look in this unusual attire. Accordingly he went below, and was soon
dressed in full sailor rig. It was a very good fit, and very becoming
to our hero, who was a remarkably handsome boy.

"A good fit, is it not?" asked the mate.

"Excellent," said Charlie.

"One would almost think the clothes were meant for you," said Randall,
with a smile, which Charlie did not understand.




                                  X.

                       CHARLIE IN A TIGHT PLACE.


Charlie surveyed himself in his new attire with some complacency.
He felt that it was becoming, and it gave him a new feeling of
manliness. In fact it seemed to him, for the time being, as if he were
really a sailor. Charlie, however, though he was very well pleased
with his sailor's rig, did not feel in the least tempted to wear it
professionally. Accordingly, after the survey was over, he began to
divest himself of it.

"What are you doing?" asked the mate, laying his hand heavily upon the
shoulder of our young hero.

"Taking off your nephew's clothes," returned Charlie, looking up in
considerable surprise at the tone in which he was addressed.

"What's that for?"

"To put on my own."

"Then you needn't trouble yourself," said Randall, composedly; "those
you have on are your own."

"What do you mean?" asked Charlie meeting the mate's triumphant look
with an open, manly glance.

"I mean," said Randall, with a sardonic look, "that the clothes were
bought for the one who now wears them."

"Bought for me!" exclaimed Charlie, in great bewilderment.

"Yes. You wondered how they happened to fit you so well. That is easily
explained. They were picked out on purpose for you. The old Jew in the
clothing-store took your measure with his eye while you were standing
there with me. Faith, he's got a pretty sharp eye."

"But your nephew?" said Charlie, his heart sinking, as he began to
comprehend the plot to which he had fallen a victim; "I thought you
said they belonged to him."

"Well," said Randall, with a harsh laugh, "you're my nephew."

"I am not," said Charlie, with something of haughtiness in his tone, as
he surveyed the mate scornfully.

"He's got his mother's look," muttered the latter. "That's the way
she looked when she sent me about my business. She'd look something
different, I fancy, if she knew I'd got her boy in my power. I've got
the whip-hand of her now, and she'll live yet to repent the day she
rejected Jack Randall."

These thoughts flashed through his mind in an instant, and did not
prevent his answering at once Charlie's bold denial.

"There's a little too much pride about you, youngster. It'll need
taming down. You're to be my nephew while you're aboard this ship.
Remember, your name is Jack Randall. Take care that you claim no other."

"What good will that do?" said Charlie. "I am not going to remain on
board."

"You're not, eh?" said the mate, significantly.

"No," said Charlie, boldly.

"Suppose I say you shall."

"Then," said Charlie, firmly, "I say you are mistaken."

Our hero was a boy of spirit, and had no idea of being disposed of
without his own consent. He commenced tugging away at his blue jacket
with the intention of pulling it off.

"What are you doing?" asked Randall, with a frown, advancing and laying
a heavy hand on the boy's shoulder. "Haven't I told you to keep those
clothes on?"

"You have no right to interfere with me," said Charlie, stoutly, his
eye flashing with indignation. "Give me back my clothes."

"You can't have them. If you strip off those you have on you'll have to
go without any."

Exasperated, Charlie made a spring forward, and attempted to wrest his
clothes from the hands of the mate.

"Ha, my fine fellow!" exclaimed Randall, as, evading the boy's grasp,
he lifted them beyond his reach. "So you are inclined to be mutinous,
are you? Very well, we have a remedy for all such cases, and a very
simple one it is."

So saying, he drew a stout cord from his pocket, and advanced towards
our hero with the intention of binding him.

Charlie sprang for the stairs, and was half way up before the mate
caught him and dragged him back.

"Well, boy, you're a pretty tough customer--true grit. You're just the
boy to make a sailor of. I must make sure of you."

So saying, he succeeded, in spite of Charlie's vigorous exertions, in
tying his hands and feet. Not until thus rendered quite helpless did
the brave boy suffer himself to burst into tears.

"What are you going to do with me?" he asked.

"I am going to make a sailor of you," answered the mate.

"But I don't want to go to sea," answered Charlie.

"So you said once before, but you'll change your mind before long."

"My mother will not know where I am. She can't get along without me,
for she depends upon me in part for support."

"I dare say she'll get along somehow," said Randall, coolly. "She won't
miss you much, and she ought to feel glad that your uncle has taken
charge of you."

"Uncle!" retorted the boy, with flashing eyes. "I wouldn't own you as
uncle for all the money in Boston."

"You wouldn't!" said Randall, his tone changing, and a dark look
overspreading his face. "Very well, my bold lad, you may have reason to
repent those words. You may find out by and by that it is as well to
be civil to your superior officer. I will do nothing about it now, but
when we are out of port and fairly at sea, look out!"

Charlie, who was quick-witted, caught a hint from these words, and at
once set up a scream, hoping to draw attention from outside.

"That's your game, is it?" said the mate. "We'll soon stop that."

So saying, he drew out the boy's own handkerchief, and gagged him
so that there was no further fear of his being able to make any
disturbance which could be heard on the wharf or on neighboring vessels.

Feeling now secure, he left Charlie mute and helpless, and ascended to
the deck.

"What was the noise I heard below, Mr. Randall?" asked the captain,
pausing in his walk, and addressing his first officer.

"My nephew!" said Randall, with a smile.

"Ha! he is a little obstreperous, is he?"

"A trifle so."

"Doesn't like the society of his uncle sufficiently to want to go to
sea with him, I suppose?"

"I dare say he would like to change his quarters," said Randall,
composedly.

"How did you reconcile him to his fate?"

"A couple of strong cords and a gag did the business. They will keep
him quiet till we get out to sea, and then perhaps we can discover some
other means of bringing him to terms."

"A slightly different application of the cords, perhaps, Mr. Randall."

The mate smiled approval of this jest, and as his services were now in
requisition to expedite preparations for departure, he left the captain
and went about his duty.

Meanwhile the mate's conduct had not been unobserved by the crew. Among
these was an old sailor who rejoiced in the name of Bill Sturdy. It is
needless to say that this was not his real name. No one appeared to
know what his real name was, and he had become so used to this, that he
generally called himself so. The name Sturdy had probably been given
him on account of his sturdy make. He was stout and very powerful.
Probably there were no two men on board the ship who would not have
felt some hesitation in attacking Bill Sturdy.

It may be added that the name was no less appropriate if we consider
it bestowed on account of his character and disposition. He was
unpolished enough, having beaten about the world all his life, yet he
had been gifted by nature with a fund of sturdy common sense and powers
of observation which made him more thoughtful and intelligent than most
of his class. He had a kind heart, and hated to see oppression. This
was his first voyage on board the Bouncing Betsey; the ship on which he
had last served having been wrecked, and he with a few others having,
with difficulty, saved themselves. Since he had engaged on board the
Betsey, the stories he had heard of the captain's brutality led him
to repent of his determination, and he had resolved within himself to
remain on board but a single voyage.

He had had his attention drawn to our hero and the mate, and he
observed that the latter came up alone from below.

"That's a trim, handsome little lad," he said to himself; "I wonder
what the mate is so attentive to him for. There's some deviltry in the
wind, as sure as my name is Bill Sturdy. I hope, for the boy's sake, he
isn't going to ship with us. If he does. I must do what I can for him,
for I mistrust he'll want a friend."




                                  XI.

                              OFF TO SEA.


The thoughts of our young hero as he lay helpless, gagged and bound,
were hardly of the most cheerful character. The blow had been so
sudden, that he was quite unprepared for it. Added to this, his
apprehensions were vague and indefinite. There seemed something
mysterious about the manner in which he had been spirited away, and
this thought increased his feeling of discomfort. A danger which can
be measured and comprehended in its full extent may be boldly faced,
however great, but when we are ignorant of its nature and extent that
is not so easy.

Charlie understood as much as this, that it was the intention of
Randall to carry him off to sea. But why he should have taken such
pains to ensnare him, when there are always plenty of boys glad to
obtain such a situation, he could not conceive.

Charlie was no coward. He was no stranger to the bold spirit of
adventure by which boys of his age are apt to be animated. Indeed,
under different circumstances, and if the arrangement had been of his
own free choice, it is quite possible that he might have looked forward
with pleasurable anticipations to the life that awaited him. But there
was one thought uppermost in his mind that gave him no little pain
and anxiety, the thought of his mother. He was her all. In the large
and busy city she knew but very few; she had none whom she could call
friends. Her hopes were all centred in him. Still farther, it was in a
great measure owing to his activity and industry that she had been able
to live with a degree of comfort, for though she was always at work,
the avenues of industry open to women are few, and toil at the needle
is so unsatisfactorily compensated that Charlie, though working fewer
hours, was able to contribute considerably more than half of the sum
required for their joint support.

How would his mother get along during his absence, the length of which
he could not estimate? Would she suffer not only in mind but in bodily
discomfort? Well he remembered how pleasantly the evenings had passed
when they were together. Now there must be a long separation. Would
he ever see his mother again? She would not be able to retain their
present lodging, now that the entire rent would fall to her to pay.
Perhaps when he did he should be unable to obtain any clew to her
whereabouts. This was indeed a terrible thought to poor Charlie, who
chafed like a caged lion in his confinement. He endeavored to unloose
the cords which bound him, but with little prospect of success; for no
one better than a sailor understands the art of tying a knot securely.

While Charlie was doing his utmost to free himself from the cords that
bound him, having already removed the gag, he was startled by a low
laugh of triumphant malice.

Looking up, he saw the mate, the author of all his misfortunes,
watching him with great apparent enjoyment.

"Ah, Jack," he said, "I see you are hard at work. Work away. If you
untie those knots you've got more skilful fingers than the one that
tied them, that's all."

"Come and release me," said Charlie. "You have no right to keep me
here."

"You are mistaken," said the mate, coolly. "I have the best of all
rights."

"And what right is that?" demanded our hero.

"_The right of power!_" answered Randall. "Might makes right, perhaps
you have heard."

"How long are you going to keep me here?" asked Charlie, after a pause.

"Till we get far enough out to sea to make it safe to release you."

Charlie kept silence. He felt that it would be useless to appeal to the
mercy of the mate, who appeared bent upon carrying him away. He turned
his face resolutely away from Randall, for whom he began to entertain
a stronger feeling of dislike than he had supposed himself capable
of feeling. Hitherto he had only been accustomed to an atmosphere of
affection, and though he had met with some rebuffs in his daily search
for employment, he could always return at night to a home and a mother,
with whom he could forget whatever had been disagreeable during the
day. Now his position was entirely changed. The only one he knew on
board the vessel was one whom he had no reason to believe friendly, but
very much the reverse.

By this time the noise upon deck, which he could hear plainly, had
become greater and greater. He could hear frequent orders given by the
captain, and also by the mate, who had now returned to his post.

Soon the vessel, which had been at rest, appeared to be moving. He
could hear the plashing of the water against its sides. He felt that it
was in motion, slow at first, but afterwards more rapid. He conjectured
that the ship was being towed out to sea by a steam-tug.

He wished that at least he could get to a window, and catch a last
glimpse of the land to which he was about to bid so unexpected a
farewell. But this, tied hand and foot as he was, was impossible, and
he felt that now it would do him no good even if he should succeed
in breaking his bonds. Already they were speeding out to sea as fast
as the tug could convey them. There was no redress or help for him
beyond the limits of the vessel in which his tyrants exercised absolute
control, for he felt well assured that Captain Brace was in league with
the mate, or, at all events, would interpose his authority to support
Randall in his plans.

So time sped on, the ship continuing all the while in steady motion.

At length the tug left them and returned to the city, leaving the
vessel to shift for itself. Although Charlie could not see what was
going on, he judged this from the noise and shouts of command given
above, to which he listened with sharpened attention.

Charlie felt that with the departure of the steam-tug all possibility
of escape had passed. The last link which had bound him to the shore
had been snapped asunder.

While he was plunged in sorrowful thought he suddenly heard a step
descending the stairs.

Thinking it was the mate, of whom he felt that he should see in future
much more than he cared, he did not turn his head.

"Hallo, my lad," was the salutation of the new-comer, in a rough, but
hearty voice, "how came you in this trim?"

It was not the mate's harsh voice. Quickly turning round, Charlie's
eyes rested on the bronzed but good-humored face of Bill Sturdy, the
stout sailor to whom reference has already been made. Whatever may be
thought of physiognomy as an index of character, it is undeniable that
we are either attracted to or repelled from certain faces.

Now the first sight of Bill Sturdy's honest and good-humored face
seemed to Charlie like a ray of light in a dark place. He felt that
he was a man to be trusted.

"Will you be a friend to me?" asked Charlie, with instinctive
confidence.

"That I will, my lad," exclaimed Bill, with hearty emphasis; "but tell
me who tied you up in this fashion?"

"His name is Randall, and I believe he is the mate."

"The lubberly rascal! And what did he do that for?"

"He entrapped me on board the vessel, and now he is carrying me out to
sea, against my will."

"How came you in your sailor's rig?" asked Sturdy.

Charlie explained the trick which had been practised upon him, which
Bill Sturdy denounced in good set terms, though possibly more strong
than refined.

"He's a rascal; there ain't a doubt of that," said Bill. "I should like
to overhaul him, and teach him better manners. As for you, my lad, I'm
sorry for you. You've shipped for the v'y'ge, and there ain't any help
for it, as I see. But you may depend upon one thing, old Bill Sturdy
will look out for you, and will be your friend."

"Thank you," said our hero, feeling more cheerful and hopeful. It was
something to have one friend on board.

"I mistrust there are some rascals aboard," muttered Bill to himself,
as he went up on deck. "They'd better not interfere with me or that
young lad!" and he extended his muscular arm with a sense of power.




                                 XII.

                         LANDLORD AND TENANT.


The payment of a thousand dollars to Randall had been a severe blow
to old Peter Manson, and this consideration materially lessened the
satisfaction which he felt in Charlie's removal.

We re-introduce him to our readers, engaged, as usual, in counting over
his hoards. Preparatory to doing so, he carefully secured the outer
door, and also the door of the apartment which he occupied.

Then lifting up a plank from the floor, he raised from beneath a large
box containing gold coins. It was very heavy, and it was not without
difficulty that the old man, who was very feeble, succeeded in lifting
it to a level with the floor.

The box was, perhaps, four fifths full.

The old man surveyed the deficiency with a groan.

"It might have been full," he muttered, "if I hadn't been obliged to
pay away such a sight of money to that determined man. One thousand
dollars! two hundred bright, sparkling coins! How many, many weary days
it will take before I can supply their place. It was all but full. It
wanted only ten more coins to make five thousand dollars. Oh gold, gold,
gold! How beautiful you are! To me you are food and drink and clothing
and friends and relations. I care for nothing but you."

While Peter was indulging in this soliloquy, he was engaged in counting
the coins in the box.

The result of the count showed one less than he had anticipated.

The old man turned pale.

"Some one has robbed me," he muttered. "Or, perchance, I have counted
wrong. I will go over it again."

This he did with eager haste and a feeling of nervous anxiety, and, to
his no small dismay, the count resulted as before.

"They have taken my money!" exclaimed Peter, tearing his white hair in
anguish. "They will make me a beggar, and I shall be reduced to want in
my old age. Oh, oh!"

In the midst of his lamentations he suddenly discovered the missing
coin, which had rolled away, without his observing it, to the opposite
side of the room.

Chuckling with delight, he picked it up and replaced it in the box.

His duty satisfactorily performed, the miser put on his cloak, and
prepared for another task. This was, to raise Mrs. Codman's rent,
and so compel her to leave the rooms which she rented of him. This,
however, was unnecessary, since, deprived of Charlie's earnings, his
mother would have found it impossible to pay the rent previously
demanded.

Peter Manson resolved to call upon his tenant in person. He was not
afraid of recognition. He felt that the changes which twenty years had
wrought in his appearance, would be a sufficient protection. Indeed,
this had already been tested; for Peter had already called several
times on the same errand, without attracting a glance which could be
construed into recognition.

It was the morning after Charlie had disappeared. He had been absent
twenty-four hours, and his mother had heard nothing of him. She was in
a terrible state of apprehension and anxiety, for few boys were more
regular than he in repairing home as soon as his daily duties were over.

Mrs. Codman had sat up late into the night, hoping against her fears
that he would return. At length, exhausted by her vigils, she sank upon
the bed, but not to sleep. In the morning she rose, unrefreshed, to
prepare her solitary meal. But it was in vain. Sorrow and anxiety had
taken away her appetite, and she was unable to eat anything.

Soon afterwards a knock was heard at the door. She hastened to
open it, hoping to hear some tidings of her lost boy. What was her
disappointment to meet the bent form and wrinkled face of Peter Manson,
her landlord.

The old man gave her a stealthy glance.

"Why did I not know her before?" he thought. "She is not so very much
changed. But I--ha, ha! she don't know who I am."

Mrs. Codman went to a drawer in her bureau, and took therefrom six
dollars.

"This is the amount of your rent, I believe," she said.

The old man greedily closed his fingers upon the money, and then, after
intimating that it was very small, avowed his determination to raise
the rent to two dollars per week.

The miser watched with gleeful exultation the look of dismay which came
over the face of his tenant.

Two dollars a week was not only beyond Mrs. Codman's means, but was,
at that time, an exorbitant rent for the rooms which she occupied. She
would scarcely have been justified in paying it while she had Charlie's
earnings as well as her own to depend on. Yet there seemed now an
imperative necessity for remaining where she was, for a time at least.
It was possible that Charlie would come back, and if she should remove,
where would he find her? Of course, he would come back! The thought
that there was even a possibility of her son being lost to her was so
full of shuddering terror, that Mrs. Codman would not for a moment
indulge it. Life without Charlie would be so full of sadness, that she
could not believe him lost.

She resolved to make an effort to arouse the old man's compassion.
She did not dream of the spite and hatred which he felt towards her.
There are none whom the wicked hate so heartily as those whom they have
injured. That is something beyond forgiveness.

Mrs. Codman knew that Peter Manson was avaricious, and to this she
attributed the increase in the rent. She had no suspicion that he had a
particular object in distressing her.

"Surely, Mr. Manson," she remonstrated, "You do not think these rooms
worth two dollars a week. It is all we are able to do to raise the rent
we now pay."

"Humph!" muttered Peter, avoiding the eye of his tenant, "they are
worth all I can get for them."

"Have you raised the rent on the other rooms in this house?"

"No, but I--I shall soon."

"Then I tremble for your tenants. Mr. Manson, if you were poor
yourself, perhaps you would have a heart to sympathize with and pity
the poor."

"If I were poor!" exclaimed the old man, betrayed into his customary
whine; "I am poor; indeed, I am very poor."

"You!" repeated Mrs. Codman, incredulously. "Why, you must receive a
thousand dollars a year from this building."

"Yet I--I am poor," persisted Peter. "I am only an agent. I--I do not
own this building; at least--I mean--there are heavy incumbrances on
it; I have to pay away nearly every dollar I receive."

"Can you let me remain a month longer for the same rent as heretofore?"
asked Mrs. Codman, anxiously.

"I--I couldn't do it," said Peter, hastily. "Either you must pay two
dollars a week, or move out."

Mrs. Codman hesitated.

She went to her bureau, and found that she had between five and six
dollars remaining in her purse. This would enable her, in addition to
what she could earn by sewing, to get along for a month.

"Very well, sir," said she, "I must stay a month longer, at any rate. I
must for my boy's sake."

"Have you a son?" asked Peter, desirous of learning from the mother's
lips that the blow had struck home.

"Yes; you have probably seen him here sometimes."

"I haven't noticed him."

"I am feeling very anxious about him. Yesterday morning he went out
on an errand for some one who had engaged him, and he hasn't been
back since. I am afraid something must have happened to him," and the
mother's eyes filled with tears.

"Perhaps he has fallen off from one of the wharves, and got drowned,"
suggested Peter, with a savage delight in the pain he was inflicting.

"You don't think it possible!" exclaimed Mrs. Codman, starting to
her feet, and looking in the old man's face with a glance of agonized
entreaty, as if he could change by his words the fate of her son.

"Such things often happen," said Peter, chuckling inwardly at the
success of his remark; "I knew a boy--an Irish boy, about the size of
yours--drowned the other day."

"About the size of my boy! I thought you had not noticed him."

"I--I remember having seen him once," stammered Peter. "He is about a
dozen years old, isn't he?"

"Yes; but you don't--you can't think him drowned."

"How should I know?" muttered Peter. "Boys are careless, very careless,
you know that; and like as not he might have been playing on the wharf,
and----"

"No, it can't be," said Mrs. Codman, with a feeling of relief which her
knowledge of Charlie's habits gave her. "Charlie was not careless, and
never went to play on the wharf."

The old man was disappointed to find that his blow had failed of
its effect, but ingenious in devising new methods of torture, he now
suggested the true cause of Charlie's absence.

"Perhaps," he said, with his cruel gray eyes fixed upon the mother,
"perhaps he's been carried off in a ship."

"Carried off in a ship!" faltered Mrs. Codman.

"Yes," said Peter, delighted by the evident dismay with which this
suggestion was received.

"But," said Mrs. Codman, not quite comprehending his meaning, "Charlie
never had any inclination to go to sea."

"Perhaps they didn't consult him about it," suggested Peter.

"_What do you mean?_" exclaimed the mother, with startling emphasis,
half advancing towards the old man.

"You--you shouldn't be so violent," said Peter, trembling, and starting
back in alarm.

"Violent! Deprive a mother of her only child, and she may well show
some vehemence."

"I--I didn't do it," said Peter, hastily.

"Certainly not," said Mrs. Codman, wondering at his thinking it
necessary to exculpate himself; "but you were saying something
about--about boys being carried to sea against their will."

"I didn't mean anything," muttered Peter, regretting that he had put
her on the right track.

"But you did, otherwise you would not have said it. For heaven's sake,
tell me what you did mean, and all you meant. Don't fear to distress
me. I can bear anything except this utter uncertainty."

She looked up earnestly in the old man's face.

Peter was somewhat amused at the idea that he might be afraid to
distress her, but decided, on reflection, to tell her that all he chose
she should be made acquainted with.

"Sometimes," he explained, "a captain is short of hands, and fills out
his number the best way he can. Now perhaps one of the ships at the
wharves might have wanted a boy, and the captain might have invited
your son on board, and, ha, ha! it almost makes me laugh to think of
it, might carry him off before he thought where he was."

"Do you laugh at the thought of such a cruel misfortune?" asked Mrs.
Codman, startled from her grief by the old man's chuckle.

"I--excuse me, I didn't intend to; but I thought he would be so much
surprised when he found out where he was."

"And does that seem to you a fitting subject for merriment?" demanded
the outraged mother.

The miser cowed beneath her indignant glance, and muttering something
unintelligible, slunk away.

"Curse her!" he muttered, in his quavering tones, "why can't I face her
like a man? I never could. That was the way when--when she rejected me.
But I shall have my revenge yet."

Strange to say, Peter's last suggestion produced an effect quite
different from that which he anticipated and intended. Days passed, and
Charlie did not come; but his mother feeling certain, she hardly knew
why, that he had been inveigled on board some vessel, felt sure he
would some day return.

"He will write to me as soon as he gets a chance," thought the mother,
"and I shall soon see him again."




                                 XIII.

                         CLOUDS AND SUNSHINE.


Small as was the remuneration which Mrs. Codman received for sewing,
she hoped, by great economy, to get along with the money which she
already had on hand. But troubles never come singly, and of this she
was destined to feel the full significance.

One morning she made up a bundle of completed work, and proceeded with
it to the ready-made clothing store of Messrs. Sharp & Keene, her
employers. It was a trial to one reared as Mrs. Codman had been, to
come into contact with men who did not think it necessary to hide their
native coarseness from one who made shirts for them at twenty cents
apiece.

On the present occasion she was kept waiting for some time, before her
presence appeared to be noticed. At length, Sharp nodded to her from
the desk.

"Ahem! Mrs. Wiggins," commenced Sharp.

"Codman, sir," corrected the one addressed.

"Well, the name don't signify, I suppose. How many shirts have you got
there?"

"Half a dozen, sir."

"Half a dozen at twenty cents apiece make a dollar and twenty cents.
Present this card at the other desk, and you will be paid."

He scratched on a card "6 shirts--$1.20," and handed to her, at the
same time calling, in a loud voice, "Here, Thomas, pay Mrs. Wigman a
dollar and twenty cents."

"Codman, sir."

"It seems to me you are mighty particular about your name."

"Shall I have more work?" asked Mrs. Codman, with some anxiety.

"Well, not at present. Business is dull just now. Nothing doing, and
won't be for some time to come."

"How long before you can probably give me something to do?" inquired
Mrs. Codman, apprehensively.

"Can't say," was the careless reply. "It may be a month, or six weeks.
You can call round in four or five weeks."

"What am I to do between now and then?" thought the poor woman, her
heart sinking.

She must get something to do. She could not live otherwise, more
especially since the rise in the rent, and her resources had been so
largely diminished by the withdrawal of Charlie's services.

She applied at several other shops which she passed on the way
home, but found, in every case, that they were already overrun with
applications, and in the slack of business would be compelled to
discharge some of those at present employed.

But the hour is the darkest that's just before day, and when fortune
has done its worst, oftentimes the tide turns, and affairs improve.

So it proved with Mrs. Codman.

On reaching home, not a little depressed at the idea of remaining
inactive, when she stood so much in need of the proceeds of her labor,
Mrs. Codman had scarcely removed her bonnet and shawl, when she heard a
knock at her door.

In answer to her "Come in," the door opened, and the washer-woman, who
roomed just above, entered.

"How do you do, Mrs. O'Grady?" said Mrs. Codman.

"I am very well, _Miss_ Codman, and I hope it's the same wid yerself.
Have you heard anything of the swate boy that was lost?"

"Nothing," was the sad reply.

"Cheer up, then, _Miss_ Codman. He'll be coming back bimeby, wid his
pockets full of gold, so that you won't have to work any more."

"I am afraid that I shall not be able to work any more at present,"
returned Mrs. Codman.

"And what for not? Is it sick that ye are?"

Mrs. Codman related the want of success which she had met with in
procuring work. She also mentioned Peter's visit and the increased
rent.

"Just like him, the old spalpeen!" broke out Mrs. O'Grady, indignantly.
"He wants to squeeze the last cint out of us poor folks, and it don't
do him any good neither. I'd be ashamed if Mr. O'Grady wint about
dressed as he does. But may be, Miss Codman, I'll get you a chance
that'll take you out of his reach, the mane ould rascal!"

"You get me a chance! What do you mean?" asked Mrs. Codman, turning
with surprise to her Hibernian friend and defender.

"I'll tell ye, only jist sit down, for it may take me some time."

This was Mrs. O'Grady's explanation, which it may be better to abridge,
for the good lady was wont to be somewhat prolix and discursive in her
narratives.

It seems she had been employed, at sundry times, in the house of a Mr.
Bowman, a wealthy merchant living on Mt. Vernon Street. This gentleman
had lost his wife some months before. The only child arising from
this union was a daughter, about ten years of age. Her father did not
like schools, either public or private, for a child of her years, and
preferred that his daughter, for the present, should be educated at
home. Hitherto she had been left pretty much to herself, and had never
been willing to apply herself to study.

Mr. Bowman was now looking out for a suitable governess for his
daughter, and it had struck Mrs. O'Grady--who, though ignorant and
uncultivated herself, was sharp-sighted enough to detect the marks of
education and refinement in another--that Mrs. Codman would suit him.

So Mrs. O'Grady, in her zeal, made bold to intimate to the servants,
through whom it reached Mr. Bowman, that she knew a sweet lady who
would be just the one for a governess for the young lady.

Now the recommendation of an Irish washer-woman may not be considered
the most valuable in an affair of this kind; but it so happened
that the suggestion reached Mr. Bowman at a time when he was so
oppressed with business cares that he did not know how to spare
the time necessary to seek out a governess. He accordingly summoned
Mrs. O'Grady to a conference, and asked some hasty questions of her,
which she answered by such a eulogistic account of Mrs. Codman, whose
condescending kindness had quite won her heart, that Mr. Bowman desired
her to request Mrs. Codman to call upon him the next day at a stated
hour.

"So you see, Miss Codman," concluded the warmhearted Irish woman, "that
you're in luck, and all you've got to do is to call upon Mr. Bowman
to-morrow, and you'll get a nice home, and won't have to work any more
at your sewing."

Mrs. Codman did not at once reply.

"And won't you go?" asked Mrs. O'Grady, wondering at her silence.

"I think I will," said Mrs. Codman; "and I feel much obliged to you, my
good friend, for saying a kind word for me, though I do not feel at all
confident that I shall obtain this place."

"Niver fear for that," said the sanguine washer-woman; "he'll see at
once that you're a rale lady, and it's in luck he'll be to get you."

Undoubtedly the position of a governess would be more remunerative,
and less laborious, than that of a seamstress, and, under present
circumstances, Mrs. Codman felt that she could not afford to throw the
chance away. She retired that night a little more cheerful and hopeful
than would have been the case had not this door of escape from the evil
of want been shown her.




                                 XIV.

                                 BERT.


In the breakfast-room of a house on Mt. Vernon Street sat two persons
with whom it is necessary that we should become acquainted.

The first is a gentleman of perhaps forty-five, rather stout, and
with a pleasant expression of countenance. He has finished his cup of
coffee, and taken up the morning paper, which he scans carefully, more
especially those parts relating to business.

At the opposite side of the table is a young lady of ten, with mirthful
black eyes, and very red cheeks, which are well set off by her black
hair. Altogether, she is very handsome, a fact of which she is not
altogether unconscious. She is lively, fresh, original, and impulsive,
not under very much restraint, but with an excellent disposition and
kindly feelings, which do not allow her to go very far wrong. Yet it
must be confessed that thus far her education has been sadly neglected,
so that, as far as learning goes, she probably knows less than most
girls two years younger.

The room, in which the father and daughter were seated, is tastefully
furnished with that regard to comfort which is found in our American
houses.

The two whom we have thus introduced are Benjamin Bowman, a wealthy
merchant, and his daughter Bertha, though, in that shortening of names
which is apt to take place in a family, hers has been shortened to
Bert, which she appears to prefer to the longer and more strictly
feminine name.

"Papa," she said, pushing away her plate, "you ain't good company at
all."

"Thank you for the compliment, Bert," he said.

"But you're not, though. There you are wearing out your eyes over that
stupid paper, and leaving me to talk to myself or Topsy. Here, Topsy,
isn't it so?"

At this summons a kitten, black as the ace of spades, and very much
addicted to fun and frolic, jumped into the lap of her young mistress,
and purred a noisy acquiescence.

"There," said Bert, triumphantly, "Topsy says I am right. I don't know
what I should do without Topsy."

"She makes a very suitable companion for you, Bert," said Mr. Bowman,
smiling.

"Why?" asked the cat's mistress, suspiciously.

"Because you can sympathize so well. Both are equally mischievous, and
it is very difficult to tell which knows the most of books."

"Now, papa, that is a slander. I will sue you for libel."

"On your own account, or the kitten's?" asked Mr. Bowman. "I really
don't know which I have done injustice to."

"Now you are laughing at me, papa. I know you are."

"Not entirely, Bert. The fact is, you are terribly ignorant for one of
your age."

"I suppose I am," said Bert, shaking her head in comic despair.

"You'll grow up with no more knowledge than a Hottentot."

"Don't they have any schools among the Hottentots?"

"I suppose not."

"How delightful that must be! Why can't we move out where they live?"

"I don't know but we shall have to," said her father, "as, hereabouts,
young ladies are expected to know something about books. But that
reminds me I don't know but I shall succeed in engaging a governess for
you to-day."

"A governess to-day!" exclaimed Bert, in dismay.

"Yes. I have made an appointment with a lady to call here at nine
o'clock, and, if I am satisfied with her, I intend to engage her."

"And if _I_ am satisfied with her," added Bert.

"Is that essential?" asked her father, smiling.

"Yes, for you know she will be with me most of the time. If she is like
Julia Campbell's governess, I sha'n't like her."

"Well, and what fault do you find with Julia Campbell's governess?"
asked Mr. Bowman, with more interest than his tone conveyed; for he
knew that if Bert did not fancy her governess she would be a most
incorrigible little rebel, and would be likely to profit very little by
her instructions.

"Oh, she's as disagreeable as she can be. In the first place, she's an
old maid,--not that that's so _very_ bad. In fact, I've about made up
my mind to be an old maid myself."

"Indeed!" said Mr. Bowman, amused. "May I inquire your reasons?"

"Too numerous to mention."

"Perhaps one is, that you don't expect to have any chance to change
your name."

"I have had a chance already," said Bert, in a matter-of-fact tone.

"Had a chance already!" exclaimed her father, in amazement.

"Yes," said the young lady of ten, "Charlie Morrill offered himself the
other day, and I refused him."

"What is the world coming to?" thought Mr. Bowman. "Why did you refuse
him?"

"Because," said Bert, soberly, "I don't like the way he parts his hair.
But as for Julia's governess, I know she never had an offer. She's as
homely as--as--well, I don't know who. Then she wears glasses, and has
a nose ever so long, and a long face, and she never smiles, and she
makes Julia study terrible hard."

And Bert drew a long breath.

"Not a very charming picture, certainly," said Mr. Bowman; "but I'll
promise you that, if the lady who applies for the post of governess
to-day should be anything like this, I won't engage her."

"That's right, papa. When do you expect her?"

"Let me see. She was to be here at nine, and now it wants only ten
minutes of that time."

"And you won't send me out of the room, papa, will you?"

Mr. Bowman hesitated.

"You know I am very anxious to see how she looks. If I like her, I will
make a sign to you, and then you can engage her."

"What sign will you make, Bert?" asked her father, amused, and yet
alive to the necessity of securing his daughter's acquiescence in his
choice.

"I don't know," said Bert, reflecting; "suppose I wink."

"And suppose the lady should see you winking at me? What do you suppose
she would think?"

"Oh, I could tell her afterwards, you know, and she would feel
flattered, knowing it was a sign that I liked her."

"She might not think it very lady-like in you."

"What's the use of being lady-like? I don't want to be. There's
Florence Gates; I suppose she's lady-like. I'll show you how she walks."

Bert imitated the gait of the young lady, swaying herself from side to
side, as she walked with mincing step, tossing her head, and exhibiting
a caricature of the airs and affectations which girls sometimes delight
to display.

"Why, she wouldn't run for a thousand dollars," exclaimed Bert. "She
would think it beneath her dignity. If _she_ is lady-like, I don't want
to be. But, hark! there goes the bell. She's coming. Now, papa, just
remember, I shall wink if I like her, and if I don't I'll make up a
face."

Bert transferred herself to an ottoman, and took Topsy into her lap.

Both she and her father looked towards the door with curiosity.




                                  XV.

                      MRS. CODMAN'S GOOD FORTUNE.


Mrs. Codman had been carefully educated at a large expense, and was
versed in all the accomplishments which are considered indispensable in
a young lady's education nowadays. It was with no degree of hesitation
on this point, therefore, that she set out this particular morning to
present herself as an applicant for the post of governess. Having no
influential friends, however, and not being able to present references
from a former employer (this being her first essay in this line), she
feared that her application would be unsuccessful. She could not but
feel a considerable degree of anxiety, for her circumstances had become
desperate, owing to the refusal of her former employers to give her any
more sewing.

She dressed herself as neatly as her limited wardrobe would admit, and
with hearty good wishes and many glowing predictions of success from
her humble friend, Mrs. O'Grady, she set out.

Though some years past thirty, Mrs. Codman so far retained the
freshness of youth, that she would hardly have been taken for this age.
As a girl she had been very beautiful, and her womanhood did not belie
her early promise. Her attire, though not expensive, was in good taste
and characterized by a lady-like simplicity.

Such was the applicant for the post of governess, upon whom the
curious eyes of Bert and her father fell as she was ushered into the
breakfast-room by the servant, who had received orders to do so. She
entered the room with the easy grace of a lady. Mr. Bowman at once
recognized her claim to be considered such by deferentially rising, and
inviting her to be seated.

"If I mistake not," he said, politely, "you are the lady who has been
recommended to me as possessing excellent qualifications for the office
of governess."

"Perhaps the recommendation was too strong and decided," said Mrs.
Codman, modestly. "I shall be glad, however, to be considered an
applicant for the position."

Here Mr. Bowman, who chanced to glance at Bert, detected her executing
a surprising succession of winks, indicating the favorable impression
which had been made upon her by the appearance of Mrs. Codman.

Already prepossessed in favor of the applicant, this was an additional
inducement to engage her, as her success would depend, to a very great
extent, upon the young lady's good-will.

"I suppose," he said, "you feel prepared to teach the branches and
accomplishments usually included in the education of a young lady."

Mrs. Codman bowed.

"I ain't a young lady," interrupted Bert, at this point, who thought
she was in imminent danger of becoming too learned.

"We hope you will be some time," said Mr. Bowman.

In reply, Bert winked once more.

There was a piano in the room.

"Will you favor us with a specimen of your playing?" asked Mr. Bowman.

Mrs. Codman sat down to the piano and played two pieces, one slow in
movement, the other rapid, showing a nice touch and easy execution.

"Thank you," said Mr. Bowman. "I am inclined to think that I shall be
glad to avail myself of your services. Should you be willing to engage
for three months at first, to see how we are mutually pleased with each
other? The pupil I have to offer you is a little addicted to mischief,
and I don't know how you may like her."

"I am quite willing to enter into such an arrangement," said Mrs.
Codman; "and in reference to the last point, I am quite sure I shall
like my pupil. I begin to like her already."

"Do you?" said Bert, with much satisfaction, rising from the ottoman,
and unceremoniously dropping the black kitten, who turned a somerset,
and ran off shaking her head.

In answer, Mrs. Codman held out her hand with a smile.

Bert hurried across the room, and placed her own in it confidingly.

"I am so glad you do," said she. "You won't make me study my eyes out,
will you?"

"That would, indeed, be a pity," said Mrs. Codman, looking at Bert's
bright eyes, sparkling with fun and mischief.

Mr. Bowman observed these signs of agreement between Bert and her new
governess with pleasure, and hastened to say, "In regard to business
arrangements we will speak by and by. I think I can promise that they
will be satisfactory to you."

It may be mentioned here, that Mr. Bowman, who was by no means disposed
to deal parsimoniously with those in his employ, fixed Mrs. Codman's
salary at six hundred dollars a year, which was four times as much as
she had ever been able to gain by her needle.

"When may we expect you?" he asked. "You have, doubtless, some
preliminary arrangements to make, for which you will please take
whatever time you may require. Meanwhile, accept this sum in advance."

He drew from his pocket-book a fifty-dollar note, which he handed to
Mrs. Codman. She could not feel any embarrassment in accepting a sum
so tendered, and bowing her thanks, intimated that she would make her
appearance on the following Monday, it being now Thursday.

The advance payment proved very acceptable to Mrs. Codman, as with it
she was enabled to replenish her wardrobe, a step rendered necessary by
her residence in Mr. Bowman's family. She was busily engaged for the
remainder of the week in supplying its deficiencies.

No one could be more overjoyed than was the humble washer-woman at
the success of her friend, of which she felt sure from the first,
knowing Mrs. Codman to be a _rale lady_. The latter, feeling that she
owed her present good fortune mainly to the zealous recommendation of
her friendly neighbor, purchased a neat dress, which Mrs. O'Grady was
prevailed upon to accept, on being convinced she would not thereby be
distressing herself, a fact of which she was assured on being told of
Mr. Bowman's liberality.

Yet there was, as the reader well knows, one thought which contributed
to diminish the joy which Mrs. Codman would otherwise have felt at
being restored, in a measure, to the mode of life to which she had been
accustomed, and relieved from the necessity of unremitting labor in
order to sustain life. This was, the thought of Charlie, her own brave,
handsome boy, who had been the joy and life of her little household,
now gone,--she knew not whither. The uncertainty as to his fate cost
her many a sleepless night. She was sustained, however, by a strong
confidence that he was yet living, and had little doubt that the
suggestion of Peter Manson was correct, that he had been carried off by
the captain of some vessel short of hands. Of course, she did not for
an instant harbor the suspicion that Peter himself had had anything to
do with his disappearance, being quite unaware that any motive existed
powerful enough to tempt the old man to such a crime.

"I shall hear from him; I shall see him again," she said, with earnest
conviction. "He is under the eye of Providence, wherever he may be, and
no harm shall befall him."

Still, even with this strong feeling of trust, there was an
uncertainty about the time when her wishes could be realized, which
could not fail to weigh upon the mother's heart. Then there was the
constant longing for his bright and enlivening presence, greater,
because he was her only child, and she was a widow.

The furniture which Mrs. Codman had in her rooms she was enabled to
dispose of without a very great sacrifice. She reserved a few articles,
endeared to her by association, which she stored in the room of her
friendly neighbor.

With her, also, she left a sum of money, sufficient to pay for her
month's rent, which would not be due for a fortnight after her removal
to the house of Mr. Bowman. Peter Manson was not a little surprised
and disappointed when, on visiting his tenant,--prepared to witness
her distress and hear entreaties for a reduction of her rent,--to find
her already gone, and to hear that she had obtained an advantageous
situation, though where, he was unable to ascertain, as Mrs. O'Grady,
with whom he was no favorite, was not disposed to be communicative.

Leaving Mrs. Codman thus comfortably provided for, we must now follow
the fortunes of our young hero, Charlie, whom we left securely bound in
the forecastle of the Bouncing Betsey.




                                 XVI.

                 THE BEGINNING OF CHARLIE'S SEA-LIFE.


When the Bouncing Betsey was fairly out to sea, Captain Brace,
anticipating, with the malicious delight which a petty tyrant feels in
the sufferings of those subject to him, the grief and terror of our
young hero, ordered Charlie to be released from his bonds and brought
before him.

This order the mate chose to execute in person.

The pressure of the cords, with which he had been bound, had chafed his
limbs, and the constraint of his position had made them ache.

As the mate busied himself in unbinding him, Charlie inquired, with a
glimmering of hope, "Are you going to let me go?"

"Where?" asked Randall.

"On shore."

"Perhaps you don't know that, by this time, we are at least forty miles
from Boston."

"Could you send me back?" asked Charlie, his heart sinking within him.

"I suppose we might turn the ship about, and go back for your
accommodation," said the mate, with a sneer; "but I don't think Capt.
Brace would consent."

"Is there no way?" implored Charlie. "Couldn't you put me on board some
ship going back?"

"You can speak to the captain about that. He has sent for you. Come
along, and don't be all day about it."

Charlie stretched himself with the intent of gaining some relief from
the stricture he had suffered, and prepared to do what he knew there
was no means of evading, he followed Randall to the presence of Capt.
Brace.

"Well, Jack," said Capt. Brace, showing his teeth in an unpleasant
manner, "how do you like life on shipboard?"

"My name is not Jack," was our hero's reply.

"Indeed! Perhaps you will do me the favor to tell me what is it."

"My name," said our hero, not liking the captain's tone, "is Charlie
Codman."

"So you pretend to be wiser than your uncle," said Capt. Brace, looking
towards the mate.

"He is not my uncle," said Charlie, boldly. If he had felt it to be
prudent, he would have added that he had no desire for a relationship
to Randall, but he knew that it would not be wise.

"Do you dare to contradict my first officer?" demanded the captain,
with a frown.

"I am only telling the truth," said Charlie, undauntedly.

"_Silence!_" roared the captain, in a passion. "If he chooses to call
you his nephew, you shall be so; do you hear that? I say, do you hear
that?" he repeated, pounding with his clenched fist upon the table
before him.

"Yes, sir," said our hero.

"Take care that you remember it then. Your name, henceforth, is Jack
Randall,--at any rate, as long as you remain aboard this ship."

"How long am I to remain on board, sir?" Charlie could not help asking.

"How long?" repeated the captain. "_Forever_, if I choose. And now as
this is the last conversation which I intend to hold with you on this
point, you will bear in mind that you are shipped on board this vessel
as a boy, and that, if you don't do your duty you'll get----"

We suppress the word with which the captain closed his sentence, not
being willing to soil our pages with it.

This was rather a hard trial for our young hero, accustomed to a
mother's gentle and affectionate words. Had he been less manly, he
would have burst into tears; but he only turned pale a little, and bit
his lips.

"Take him on deck, Mr. Randall, and set him to work," said the captain;
"and mind, Jack, that I don't hear any complaints of you."

Charlie followed the mate to the deck. He had made up his mind that he
must stay in the ship during the voyage, or, at all events until they
reached land somewhere, and resolved that, since it was forced upon
him, he would do his duty as well as he could, and so afford as little
advantage as possible to those who seemed determined to persecute him.

He was set to work by Randall, who told him, in a sharp tone, to "mind
his eye and keep to work, if he knew what was best for himself."

The work was not difficult, but Charlie's fingers were unpractised,
and he might very soon have incurred the wrath of the captain and
mate, if Bill Sturdy, the sailor whose friendly advances to our hero
have already been noticed, had not approached him, the mate being
temporarily out of earshot, and given him a little instruction.

"Well, my lad, what news?" inquired Bill. "Shipped for the voyage, are
you?"

"That's what the captain and mate say," returned Charlie.

"They're a pair of precious rascals," said Bill, lowering his voice,
"and it's my opinion they're well matched, so far as villainy goes."

"What made you ship on board the vessel?" inquired Charlie.

"Bless your soul, boy, I wouldn't a done it if I'd known who was in
command; leastways, if I had known a little more about him. But I
didn't ask any questions. I had just got in from a v'y'ge to Calcutta,
and happened to see one of my old shipmates, Jim Davis, walking on
the wharf. 'Bill,' says he, 'why won't you ship along of me?' I asked
him where he was bound, and he telled me to Valparaiso, on board the
Bouncing Betsey. Well, I've been most everywhere else, but I had never
been there, and reckoned I should like to see it. Besides, I'd got
tired of going to Calcutta. I've been there, man and boy, six or eight
times. It's too hot to live there some parts of the year. So I just
told him I was in for it if he was, provided there was a vacancy. I
asked him if he knew anything about the officers. He said he didn't,
but he guessed they would pass. So I just stepped into the office and
shipped. There, lad, that's the whole story. I don't mind it much
myself. They don't generally meddle much with me."

"Have you sailed with bad captains before?" inquired our hero.

"Yes, my lad, sometimes. One captain I sailed with--I was a young man
then--was Captain Maguire. He was a sort of an Irishman, I surmise, and
mighty fond of drink. He was pleasant enough when he was sober, but
that wasn't often. When he was drunk, he got into a regular fury. He
would tear round the deck like as he was crazy, and so he was after a
fashion, for he didn't seem to know, after he had got out of his fits,
what he had done when he was in 'em. One day, I remember, as I was at
work, he came up to me, and gave me a terrible thwack side of the head,
swearing like a trooper all the time."

"What did you do?" asked Charlie, looking up with interest into the
weather-beaten face of the old sailor.

"I'll tell you," said Sturdy; "you see, I'm pretty strong," glancing
at his brawny arms and herculean frame with pardonable complacency; "I
don't often meet a man I can't manage as easily as the mate can manage
you. Now the captain wasn't a large man, by any means, nor very strong,
either. As to the mates,--one of them was sick in his berth, and the
other was in another part of the ship; so I just took the captain up
in my arms, and carried him down to the cabin, kickin' and cursin', as
might be expected, and laid him down there. The officers did not see
what was goin' on, or there'd have been trouble. As for the crew, they
enjoyed it, and wouldn't a man of 'em tell; and as the captain didn't
remember anything about it the next day, I didn't get punished."

"Did you ever get punished?" asked Charlie.

"Never since I grew up, and had these to fight my way with," said Bill
Sturdy, showing his fists, which looked as if a blow from either of
them would have felled an ox. "No, my lad, these are what I call my
sledge-hammers, and I'd as lives have them to rely upon as a pair of
pistols."

At this point in the conversation Bill was called off to some other
part of the vessel, and the mate coming up discovered, somewhat to his
disappointment, that our hero had discharged his task in a manner which
did not admit of censure.




                                 XVII.

                         THE RIVAL CHAMPIONS.


It is customary to divide a ship's crew into two watches, whose duty it
is to alternate in keeping a lookout at night. The first night-watch
commences at eight o'clock, and continues till midnight. This watch is
then relieved by the second, who have had an opportunity of sleeping
in the mean time, and who remain on duty till four A. M. They then
give place to the first, who are again on duty till eight in the
morning. Thus it will be seen that a part of the crew have eight hours'
sleep, while the remainder have but four. This inequality, however, is
remedied the next evening, when the hours are changed.

Charlie was fortunate in one respect. He was placed on the same watch
with Bill Sturdy, who had established himself, in some sort, as the
boy's protector, and did not scruple to avow it. When some of the crew
began to tease and play rough practical jokes upon Charlie,--a mode of
treatment to which boys are frequently subjected on board ship,--Bill
Sturdy interfered, and in a sonorous voice exclaimed,--

"Look here, shipmates, don't lay a finger on this boy!"

"And why not?" inquired a burly sailor, with naturally repulsive
features.

"Because I say so," retorted Bill Sturdy.

"Who is he, I should like to know, that we are to keep our distance?"

"I'll tell you who he is, shipmates," was the answer. "He's a boy that
the mate has entrapped on board without his own consent."

"Isn't he the mate's nephew?"

"No more than I am, though the mate chooses to call him so. He's got a
mother living in Boston, and he's her only boy. She doesn't know what
has become of him. Now, shipmates, he seems to be a fine lad, and I'm
going to stand by him for his sake and his mother's."

Sailors are generous when you reach their hearts, and there was a
murmur of approbation when Bill concluded.

But there is no rule without an exception, and that exception was the
scowling sailor who has already been mentioned. Few knew much about
him. This was his second voyage on board the Bouncing Betsey. Next to
Bill Sturdy he was the stoutest and most athletic sailor on board the
ship. During the previous voyage he had been the bully of the crew,
taking advantage of his personal strength. Now they were relieved from
his tyranny. In Bill Sturdy he had more than found his match. No one,
comparing the two men, could doubt, that in a contest, the odds would
be decidedly in favor of Bill. Antonio, for this was his name, for he
was a Spaniard by birth, could not help seeing the changed state of
affairs. Now no one likes to be eclipsed, and to see the authority
passing from his hands into those of another. Certainly Antonio did not
behold this transfer with indifference. He could not brook holding the
second place, where the first had been his. But how could he help it?
Very evidently the opinions of the crew favored Bill Sturdy; not only
because they believed him to excel Antonio in physical qualities, which
hold a high value in the eyes of a sailor, but because he had, as yet,
shown no disposition to abuse his power. Antonio was resolved not to
yield without a struggle, and therefore determined to take the first
occasion to pick a quarrel with his rival, as this would give him an
opportunity to measure his strength with him. Antonio did not see, what
was evident to all else, that his rival was undeniably his superior
in prowess. People are generally slow to admit their own inferiority.
That is only natural. He hoped, therefore, that he should be able to
re-establish his supremacy by coming off a conqueror in the contest
which he had determined to do all in his power to bring about.

Antonio's attention had not been especially called to our hero, until
he heard Bill Sturdy avow his determination to take him under his
protection. Then, in a spirit of perverseness, and because he thought
it would open the way for the trial of strength which he courted, he
resolved to oppose him, and openly espouse the other side.

Accordingly, when the murmurs of applause, which had been elicited by
his rival's frank and generous appeal to the sympathies of the crew,
had subsided, Antonio looked round on the rough faces which surrounded
him, and growled,--

"Well, shipmates, are you going to submit to what this fellow says? He
dares you to touch this snivelling milk-sop of a boy."

Some of the faces grew dark and threatening at this representation.
Nothing stirs up a sailor's heart to opposition so readily as anything
which resembles a threat.

Bill Sturdy hastened to reply.

"He is wrong. I don't threaten any of you. I only ask if it is right to
play tricks, and abuse a boy who has already been treated so scurvily
by the mate. I don't believe there's any one of you that wants to curry
favor with Mr. Randall and the captain. Now there is nothing they will
like better than to see you kicking round this lad."

Neither the captain nor the mate stood very high in the good graces of
the crew, and the effect produced by this statement showed that it was
adroitly conceived.

Bill Sturdy took advantage of this to add, "Now, lads, when I say I am
going to stand by this boy, and see that he isn't abused, I know you'll
stand by me."

This frank and bold speech produced a decided reaction in favor of
Charlie.

There was another murmur of approbation, which was interrupted by a
stamp upon the deck by Antonio, who, with a ferocious contortion of
countenance, shouted, "If you're all going to follow this man's lead,
and do like dogs whatever he bids you, you'll find there's one here
that dares to be independent."

Saying this, he advanced suddenly to Charlie, who was at work near by,
and, seizing him by the shoulder, was about to proceed to some act of
violence.

As soon as Bill Sturdy perceived his design, he sprang forward and gave
him a powerful blow which would have felled him to the deck, had not
Bill slipped a little, as he delivered it.

Instantly the Spaniard's sallow face was suffused, and, with a torrent
of oaths and a howl of fury, he precipitated himself upon Sturdy.

But it was easier to catch a weasel asleep, than to take the stout
sailor unprepared.

With his feet firmly planted upon the deck, and his fists in a proper
position, he received the bully, parrying his blows with wonderful
dexterity, and succeeding in planting others no less effective.

A ring of sailors gathered around, eager to watch the progress and
termination of the affray. There were not a few among them, who enjoyed
the punishment which they foresaw the Spaniard would receive from his
antagonist. He had so tyrannized over them in the past, that they felt
little sympathy for him now.

Baffled, blinded, and howling with mingled rage and vexation, the
Spaniard continued the unequal fight. As for Bill Sturdy, he was cool
and collected, apparently neither angry nor excited, but wary and on
the alert.

At length Antonio, perceiving a marlinespike at a little distance,
sprang towards it. It was a critical moment for Bill Sturdy, for a
marlinespike, in the hands of a furious and determined man, is a
formidable weapon.

His movement did not escape the notice of Sturdy.

He had acted principally on the defensive thus far, but he now saw that
something decisive must be done.

Springing forward, he closed with his assailant, lifted him from the
deck, and, carrying him to the companion-way, hurled him down stairs.

Then, turning to the crew, he exclaimed, "Shipmates, I call you to
witness that this quarrel was forced upon me. Have I done right or
wrong?"

"Right!" exclaimed all, in concert.

At this moment the mate, attracted by the noise, came on deck.




                                XVIII.

                          ANTONIO'S RESOLVE.


"What has been going on?" asked Randall, perceiving, from the position
of the sailors and their looks, that something had happened. What it
was, he surmised, having heard something of the noise of the conflict.

No one of the sailors spoke, but all looked at each other in hesitating
silence.

"What was it? Are you all deaf?" demanded the mate, impatiently.

"A little fight, that is all, Mr. Randall," answered Bill Sturdy,
coolly hitching up his pants.

"And you were one of the parties?"

"I believe I was."

"And who was the other?"

"Antonio."

"And where is he now?"

"He has gone below," said Bill, in a significant tone.

"What was the fight about?" inquired Randall, who, in ordinary cases,
would not have cared to pursue the subject farther, but had an
undefined idea that it was in some way connected with our hero, for
whom he felt no peculiar affection.

"The fact is," said Bill Sturdy, "Antonio undertook to abuse that lad
there," pointing to Charlie; "and I ain't one to stand by and see a boy
abused. Besides," he added, with a latent humor which all understood,
though he did not allow it to alter the gravity of his countenance, "I
knew he was your nephew, and that made me the more anxious to defend
him."

Randall was placed in an awkward predicament. He could not deny that
Charlie was his nephew after his express declaration to that effect,
while at the same time the relationship which he claimed was far from
exciting, in his own mind, any attachment for the boy. Still it closed
his mouth for the time. He only muttered, in an undertone, that the boy
must fight his own battles, and disappeared from the deck.

"Fight his own battles!" repeated Sturdy, indignantly. "A pretty sort
of an uncle he is, to match a boy of fourteen against a grown man, and
a strong one at that. However," added Sturdy, complacently, "the lad's
got a friend that is a match for Antonio at any time."

"That he has," answered a comrade; "but I say, Bill; I couldn't help
laughing to see how you made that old shark shut up his mouth by
telling him it was his nephew you were fighting for. It made him mad,
but he didn't know what to say against it."

"His nephew! No, Jack, it's well the lad isn't any kith or kin of his.
A drop of his blood would be enough to spile a decent lad."

"Ay, that it would."

Presently Antonio came on deck with a sullen air, half of defiance,
half of humiliation, at his recent defeat. He smarted under the
conviction, that henceforth his authority among the crew would be
small. Hitherto he had been the champion and bully of the quarter-deck,
and although the crew had no liking for him, but rather a decided
feeling of an opposite nature, yet strength and prowess always command
a certain rude respect among sailors, and that respect he enjoyed. But
now all was changed. He had been beaten, and that in a fair fight,
where all could see that no underhand means had been employed. Strength
had been matched against strength, and he had come off second best.
That had been a Waterloo day to him, and he knew that he returned to
the deck no longer the same man so far as consideration went.

Bill Sturdy was a generous antagonist. He had no idea of indulging in
exultation over his vanquished foe, but treated him as if nothing had
happened.

But Antonio's resentment was deep and implacable. He thirsted for
revenge, and determined to lull to sleep the suspicions of his late
opponent, until some opportunity should present itself for an effectual
and safe revenge.

Accordingly he suddenly recovered from his sullenness, and made some
half advances towards Sturdy, which the latter met, but not without
reserve.

"I can't kind o' feel as if the feller was to be trusted," said Bill to
Charlie, one evening, as they were alone together. "There's something
in his eye that I don't like; a sort of deceitful gleam, as if there
was something covered up that he didn't like to show. For my part, I
like to be fair and above board, and show just what I am."

"I'm sorry you have made an enemy of this man on my account," said
Charlie.

"Avast, my lad, do you think I was going to stand still and let him
abuse you? Thank heaven, old Bill Sturdy isn't such a lubber as that."

"But he may do you a mischief yet, Bill."

"Let him come within the reach of my arm," said Bill, swinging his
brawny right arm as he would a flail, "I guess he wouldn't want to try
it again."

"But he may take you at advantage."

"He will have to get up early in the morning, then," said Sturdy, in a
tone of confidence. "No lubberly foreigner is likely to get ahead of
Bill Sturdy, I can tell you that, my lad."

Both Bill and Charlie supposed that they were alone, and that this
conversation was unheard by any other person, but in this they were
mistaken.

On the other side of the mast crouched the dark figure of a man, who
seemed to be listening intently to the conversation between the two. He
remained very quiet, fearing, doubtless, that he should be observed.
Evidently what he heard did not affect him pleasantly. His brow
contracted, and a scowl of hatred made his features look even more
dark and forbidding than was their wont, especially when Bill Sturdy
made use of the last expression, his face exhibited a concentrated
malice, which could only have been generated in a heart full of evil
passions.

He ground his white teeth together and muttered to himself, as he crept
cautiously from his place of concealment, and made his way to his bunk
in the forecastle. "We shall see, we shall see. No man shall insult and
triumph over me without repenting of it. He shall know, some time, what
it is to excite the vengeance of a desperate man. He thinks the lion
has become a lamb. He will find out his mistake."

Antonio might more appropriately have compared himself to a serpent,
for his character had more of the subtlety of the noxious reptile than
of the boldness and freedom of the monarch of the forest.

Unconscious of the concealed listener to their discourse, Bill Sturdy
and our young friend continued their conversation. In the hours of
darkness, when night broods upon the ocean, and no sound is to be
heard save the dashing of the waves against the sides of the vessel,
the sailor who is obliged to stand his watch would find the hours pass
wearily if it were not for some method of killing the time. Among these
is the spinning of yarns, for which sailors are so noted. This it was
that occurred to Bill, as he stood with Charlie leaning over the side.

"I say, my lad, suppose we spin a yarn apiece, and that will make the
time pass quicker."

"But I am not an old sailor, Bill; I don't know anything about spinning
yarns."

"Tush, lad, I don't expect a salt-water yarn from you. I want a land
yarn. I am sure, you have read a good many, and can think of one now.
Just lead off, and when you get through, I'll try my hand at it."

Thus adjured, Charlie said, "Let me think a minute."

Bill leaned over the rail in silent expectation.




                                 XIX.

                         CHARLIE'S LAND YARN.


Charlie deliberated a moment, when he chanced to think of Nicholas
Nickleby, the only one of Dickens's works he had ever read, and which,
as it had interested him exceedingly, had impressed itself upon his
remembrance.

"Did you ever hear of Nicholas Nickleby, Bill?" he inquired.

"Yes," was Bill's unexpected response; "when I was at Liverpool three
years ago, she was lying alongside our ship."

"She!" exclaimed Charlie, in amazement.

"Yes," answered Sturdy, in a matter-of-fact tone, "she was a very good
craft, and was in the West India trade. I saw considerable of her,
being as how I got acquainted with Tom Seagrove, one of the men on
board."

"Oh, yes, I see what you mean," said Charlie; "but I don't mean a ship,
I mean a story of the same name."

"No, I never heard of it. Named after the ship, like enough."

Charlie thought it more probable that the vessel was named after the
story, but as this was a point of little importance to the present
occasion, he passed it by, and continued, "Well, Bill, it's a very
interesting story, and as I remember that about as well as anything I
ever read, I believe I will tell you part of it."

"Heave ahead, my lad."

"You must know that this Nicholas Nickleby was a young man whose father
died when he was about nineteen, leaving him very little money, but a
mother and sister to provide for. He had an old uncle Ralph, who was
very rich, but an old rascal, who didn't trouble himself about his poor
relations."

"That's the way with a good many rich people," said Bill. "They leave
the smaller craft to shift for themselves."

"However, on being applied to, he did manage to get the sister a place
in a millinery establishment, and, as for Nicholas, he got him a place
as assistant teacher in a country boarding-school."

"He was a sort of first mate in the school, wasn't he?"

"Well, something like that, only he didn't fare half so well as a mate
or any kind of an officer. All the old fellow gave him for his services
was about twenty-five dollars a year and board."

"What made him ship on board the craft, then?"

"It was the only chance he had, so he thought he'd take it till he
could find a better."

"What was the captain's name?" asked Bill, who stuck to his marine
phraseology.

"His name was Squeers, and a tough old fellow he was. He had some
thirty or forty boarding scholars, whom he treated shamefully. In the
first place, he didn't allow them enough to eat."

"Why didn't they mutiny, and pitch the lubber overboard?" exclaimed
Bill, indignantly.

"Because he had starved the spirit out of them. Besides, they were
mostly small, and he had a wife as bad as himself, as well as a
daughter who was----"

"A chip of the old block."

"Exactly. Do you want to know how he took away their appetites so that
they wouldn't eat so much? He used to make them swallow a spoonful of
boiling hot molasses, which scalded their throats, and made it hard for
them to swallow."

"I'd like to have overhauled him," said Sturdy.

"If you had, I don't believe there'd have been much left of him, for he
was a spindling sort of a man, tall and thin."

"And how did the young fellow like his place?"

"Not very much. He found they were going to half-starve him, too.
However, he wouldn't have minded that so much as seeing the poor
children abused. While all this was going on, the school-master's
daughter fell in love with him."

"Was she pretty?"

"No," said Charlie. "She was the image of her father, and he wasn't
anything of a beauty. She was thin, with a hatchet face and yellow
hair. However, she continued to make herself think that Nicholas was
in love with her, and one day, when her father and mother were gone
to London to get a new scholar, she posted off to a female friend of
hers, and told her that she had got a beau, and invited her friend and
her beau to come to tea. When tea-time came, there they all were in
the sitting-room, drinking tea, and faring a great deal better than
Nicholas had before, since he had been at the school, when the other
young lady and her beau began to poke fun at Nicholas, all on account
of Matilda Squeers, whom they supposed him to be in love with. He
didn't understand it at all, and told them so.

"'Why,' said John Brodie,--that was the other girl's beau,--'ain't you
courtin' Tilda, here?'

"Nicholas protested that he never so much as thought of the thing.
At this, Matilda turned all sorts of colors, for she had confidently
told both of them that he was in love with her, and, besides, she had
no idea that a poor, under-paid teacher would think of refusing her,
the----"

"Captain's daughter," suggested Bill Sturdy.

"Exactly so. So you see the tea-party didn't end quite so pleasantly
as it began, and from that moment Nicholas had a bitter enemy in the
daughter of his employer."

"That's the way with female craft," said Bill. "What happened next?"

"Mr. and Mrs. Squeers came home, bringing the new boy with them. The
first thing they did was to give a whipping all round, to make up for
the time they'd been away."

"I wish I'd been there," said Bill, swinging his brawny arms.

"Among the scholars was one, worse treated than the rest, named Smike.
He had been with them ever since he was a boy of six or eight, and his
friends had deserted him. Mr. Squeers would have cast him off, only he
found his work more than paid for the scanty food he ate, so he kept
him; but he was so beaten and cuffed, and made to drudge so constantly,
that it would have been better for him if he had been turned away. At
last he determined to run away."

"Good for him!" said Bill.

"As soon as Mr. Squeers found he was gone, he went after him post
haste, and, as the boy was weak and couldn't travel very fast, he soon
overtook him, and brought him back, bound hand and foot, in the chaise.
He suspected that Nicholas had helped Smike to escape, so he determined
to inflict a cruel punishment upon him in presence of his assistant.
Accordingly, he armed himself with a large whip, and, calling all the
school together, he told Smike to strip, and was just about to lay
the whip on his naked back when Nicholas shouted out 'Stop!' Squeers
glared round, and said in a fierce voice, 'Who said that?' 'I said it,'
said Nicholas; 'I tell you, stop!' Squeers turned white with rage,
and threatened to whip Nicholas, also. He was about to commence the
punishment, when Nicholas sprang from his seat, and, pulling the whip
from his hand, knocked Squeers over, and began to belabor him with his
own whip."

"Good!" exclaimed Bill, who had become much interested in the
narrative. "I hope he made him scream for mercy."

"So he did, and Nicholas kept on belaboring him, notwithstanding Mrs.
Squeers and her daughter went at him tooth and nail, and tried to pull
him off. But he was so excited with anger that he felt strong enough to
cope with half a dozen, and never left off till Squeers was black and
blue and aching all over."

"Hurrah for Nicholas!" shouted Bill Sturdy, in great delight, at the
school-master's discomfiture. "What happened next?"

"Nicholas packed up his clothes and left the house, but took care to
carry Smike with him, knowing that he would otherwise fare badly."

"And what became of Nicholas afterwards? Did he reach port?"

"He met with a variety of adventures, but at length became rich and
happy."

"That's a pretty good yarn," said Bill Sturdy. "I should have liked to
help him whip the school-master, though."

"Now, Bill, I am ready to hear your yarn," said Charlie.




                                  XX.

                         BILL STURDY'S STORY.


After pausing a moment to collect his ideas, Bill Sturdy commenced his
story.

"It was, mayhap, twelve years ago, or it might have been thirteen,
since I sailed from New York in the ship Peregrine, bound for Havana.
The Peregrine was quite a sizable ship, and I expected a pleasant
voyage, as the captain was a frank, good-humored looking man. So he was
when he was in his sober senses, but, unfortunately, this wasn't always
the case. However, he used to keep pretty straight when he was at home,
for if he had shown himself out it might have been hard for him to get
employment. If Jack gets drunk it's no serious damage to the ship, but
if the chief officer, to whom all look for commands, allows himself
to drink too much, especially when a storm threatens, it's a pretty
bad matter. You see, my lad, that when a captain is drunk, he does not
generally know it himself, and is apt to think that he is perfectly
able to manage the ship.

"Well, Captain Harvey, for that was his name, was an excellent seaman
when he was sober. He was a thorough sailor, and knew every rope in the
ship. But, as it happened, it would have been better if we had had a
captain who knew less and kept sober.

"Captain Harvey kept pretty straight at first, as I was saying, and we
men began to like him. He was a pleasant-spoken man, though he meant to
be obeyed when he gave an order. I liked him all the better, because
the captain I had gone with last was a different kind of man. It wasn't
always a word and a blow with Captain Lafarge, but oftentimes the blow
came first. Well, times seemed changed, and that was what I was saying
to a messmate of mine, who had sailed with me under the other captain,
when Captain Harvey came on deck. That was the third day out; his face
looked unusually red, and his eyes bloodshot. He staggered up to us,
gave me a blow side of the head, as he said, or rather hiccoughed, for
he couldn't speak very plain, 'Wh--what are you--hic--doing there, you
rascal?'

"Now, my lad, I'm not one to stand a blow very patiently; I'm rather
apt to resent it, and so I should this time, but as I looked up I saw
how matters stood, and that took away my anger. I liked Captain Harvey,
and I knew that when he was right he would never think of giving me
a blow without any cause, so I didn't do anything, but answered, as
respectful as I could,--

"'I hope I am doing my duty, Captain Harvey.'

"'You lie,' he stuttered again.

"I did not feel called upon to give any answer to this charge. It was
as well that I didn't, for he waited a minute and then left me.

"Well, this was the first that any of us knew of the captain's habits.
We were all sorry, even those that liked to drink themselves, for this
was the only fault we could detect in our chief officer, and it was a
pretty serious one, as it turned out. I told you, didn't I, that we
were bound for Havana?"

"Yes," said Charlie.

"Well, it sometimes happens that there are violent storms in those
latitudes, and the coast is dangerous to approach. Time passed, and
although Captain Harvey would have his blow-out now and then, yet there
had been no particular damage so far, perhaps because we had had pretty
quiet weather. Now, however, we had got into the region of gales, and
we all hoped the captain would keep sober.

"But that wasn't to be.

"One morning, I remember, we had a powerful gale. The ship was behaving
pretty well under it. She was a staunch craft when we started, and bade
fair to see a great many years' service. So, on the whole, we didn't
feel uneasy till the captain came on deck.

"We saw at once that he was drunk, a good deal drunk, and not fit to
take care of the ship. He staggered up to the mate, and asked him how
fast the ship was going.

"The mate reported, ten knots an hour.

"'Ten knots an hour!' repeated the captain, contemptuously. 'Is that
all? We must go faster.'

"'But, Captain Harvey,' said the mate, 'there is a violent gale. Do
you think it prudent to increase our speed?'

"'Prudent!' thundered the captain, 'do you think I would give the order
if I didn't think so? Not a word more, sir, but call all hands, and
make sail.'

"Nothing was to be done but to obey.

"Accordingly the reefs were let out of the topsails, the top gallant
sails set, and even the fore top-mast studding sail. Now, my lad,
although you are not much of a sailor, you can understand that it was
perfect madness to carry so much sail in such a tempest. I knew at once
what would happen, and prepared for the worst. There was a hen-coop
lying on deck, and I resolved, that if the worst should come to the
worst, I would spring for that.

"The worst did come to the worst. The ship pitched about like a mad
thing, and creaked and groaned as if she were a human being in the
greatest distress, and I can tell you the sailors looked black enough.
We felt that our lives were being risked, and all for the intemperance
of one man. That scene cured me of drinking grog. I haven't drank a
drop since."

"Did anything happen to the ship?"

"Yes, my lad, something did happen to the ship. A heavy sea struck her
amidships, and pitched her over upon her side. After we recovered,
we found that she was strained severely and leaking badly. Well,
the end of it was, that we had to abandon her. The rest of the crew
got on board the boats, but there wasn't fairly room, and they were
so overloaded that I thought it would be safer trusting to the old
hen-coop. They tried to get me on board the boats, but I had a kind of
suspicion that the boats wouldn't live. So I stuffed all my pockets
with biscuit, filled a tin measure with water, and trusted myself to
the hen-coop."

"Did the boats live?" inquired Charlie, with interest.

"Not a single one. They were never heard from again. No doubt they all
went down in the storm.

"Well, my lad, it wasn't the pleasantest thing pitching about on a
hen-coop on the wild sea, fifty miles, at least, from land. But my
hope was, that I should be seen by some vessel bound for Havana. In
that case I knew I would be safe. I had provision enough to last me
three days, and I could make my water last as long by being sparing of
it. I had to hold on to the hen-coop pretty tight, or I should have
been washed off by some of the heavy seas. Of course, I got completely
drenched by the salt water, and what was worse, the biscuit got
drenched too, which didn't improve its taste, I can tell you.

"So I tossed about for twenty-four hours. By this time the gale had
gone down, and the sea was more quiet. It was at this time that,
casting my eyes about to see if I could anywhere catch sight of a sail,
I descried one apparently making towards me."

"Wer'n't you delighted?"

"I was at first," said Bill, "but as she came nearer I tried not to
attract her notice."

"Why?" asked Charlie, in great surprise.

"Because, my lad, _I recognized in her the Red Rover, one of the most
noted pirates that cruised in those seas_."




                                 XXI.

                           THE PIRATE SHIP.


"How did you know she was a pirate?" inquired Charlie.

"I suspected her in the first place, from her rakish look. All pirate
ships, you know, are made for speed. Besides, this particular ship had
been described to me by a messmate who had once been on board a ship
that was chased by her, though, luckily, before the pirate had a chance
to overhaul her, two other vessels came in sight, and frightened her
away.

"As soon as I made out the approaching vessel to be the Red Rover,
I repented bitterly the signs by which I had drawn her attention. I
ceased making signals, but it was too late. She had already seen me,
and a boat was filling with men to take me on board. Finding I could
not well help myself, I concluded to make the best of it, and not show
any objection to going with the boat's crew. So when they came near,
and hailed me, asking me who I was, I answered as heartily as I could,
'Bill Sturdy, of the good ship Peregrine, bound for Havana.'

"'And what's become of your ship?'

"'Gone to the bottom,' I answered.

"'How long since?'

"'About twenty-four hours.'

"'How did it happen?'

"In reply, I told all the circumstances, without reserve, for
concealment would have done no good.

"There was a little consultation on board the boat, and then the
officer in command brought it up alongside my hen-coop, and ordered me
aboard.

"This I did with as much alacrity as possible, and I tell you, my lad,
it did seem good once more to be in a boat, even though it belonged to
a pirate, after pitching about on a hen-coop for twenty-four hours.

"Now that I had a chance, I looked at the men that manned the boat.
They were villainous-looking cutthroats--mostly Spaniards, with dark,
lowering faces and forbidding expressions. I couldn't help turning it
over in my mind, what they would be likely to do with me.

"It didn't take long to reach the pirate vessel. Those on board pressed
forward, as I came up and got on deck. They were all pretty much alike.
The captain was a large, stout, muscular man, though I believe," added
Bill, with some complacency, "that I could have got the better of him
in a regular rough-and-tumble fight. However, this isn't neither here
nor there. He came up to me, and made me answer over again the same
questions which had been asked me before. I answered them in the same
way. After he had got through with his questions, he fixed his sharp,
black eyes on me, and inquired, 'Do you know the name of the ship that
has picked you up?'

"'I do,' said I, coolly, though I didn't feel as cool as I appeared.

"'Ha!' he exclaimed, in surprise. 'What is it?'

"'It is the Red Rover,' said I, making believe to be unconcerned.

"'And are you acquainted with its character?" said the captain, with
another of his sharp looks.

"'I believe so,' said I.

"'Name it.'

"'I think it is a pirate,' said I, not moving a muscle.

"'Ha!' he exclaimed, looking at me rather curiously. 'Are you not
afraid to find yourself on board a pirate?'

"'Why should I be?' I answered. 'But for you, I should have died on the
hen-coop, and I suppose, if you had meant to take away my life, you
wouldn't have taken the trouble to save me, since death was certain.'

"'A bold fellow!' said the captain, aside, to the mate. He spoke in
the Spanish language, but I had managed to pick up some odd phrases in
that lingo, so I knew what he was driving at. The mate seemed to agree,
and they talked a little more. I didn't understand, but guessed it was
about me.

"The pirate captain, after a short confab with the mate, turned round,
and spoke to me. 'Well, my man,' said he, 'I don't mind telling you
that you've hit the mark in guessing that this is the Red Rover, and a
pirate. I believe she has made something of a reputation for herself,'
he added, proudly.

"I bowed.

"'Now I have a proposal to make to you. We're rather short-handed. We
need two or three brave fellows, and I am inclined to think, from your
bearing, that you will suit us. Now, if you would like it, you shall be
admitted to equal privileges with the rest of the crew, with an equal
share of whatever booty we manage to pick up, and that I may tell you,
is not small. Here, Roderigo, step forward, and tell this man how much
your share was last year.'

"Roderigo, a villainous-looking fellow, stepped forward, and answered,
'Nearly two thousand dollars in goods and money.'

"'You see, then, what are the inducements. Will you join us or not?'

"Now I very well knew what the consequences of my refusal would be, so
I replied, without a moment's hesitation, 'I will.'"

"What, did you become a pirate?" asked Charlie, horror-struck.

"Pretty much in the same way that you became a sailor, my lad; because
I couldn't help it."

"And did you join in robbing vessels, and killing all on board?"

"Hold on, my lad; you're a little too fast for me. You'll know in due
time. The pirate captain seemed pleased with my promptness, and made
me sign the book. I should have given a wrong name, only I had given
the right one when I was hailed, though, for that matter, Sturdy isn't
my right name. The captain told me, in a very polite sort of way, that
if I should undertake to play them false, or interfere with them in
any way, I should be pitched overboard. As this threat did not seem
to trouble me much, he seemed to be satisfied that it was all right
with me. In the course of a day or two, I got acquainted with the
crew. They were mostly Spaniards, but there was a sprinkling of other
nations,--French, Danes, Germans, and one Englishman."

"Were there any Yankees?"

"No, I'm proud to say there wasn't one except myself, and I wasn't
there of my own free will. Piracy doesn't chime in with our Yankee
notions, and it's my belief you'll find precious few full-blooded
Yankees that are engaged in the business."

"How did you get out of their clutches?" asked Charlie.

"That's what I'm coming to by and by. For a few days we didn't meet a
vessel, or, at least, one that was alone, and so would do to attack.
I was glad of that, for I was ready enough to do my duty on board the
ship, but I knew that, just as soon as we met a vessel, I should be
expected to do my share of the fighting, and it went against my grain
to engage in any such villainous business as that. However, I thought I
wouldn't borrow trouble, but wait till it came, and then I could decide
what to do.

"At last I heard the cry I so much dreaded, 'Sail ho!' from one of the
crew, who had been sent aloft to give notice of an approaching vessel.

"'Where away?' shouted the pirate captain.

"'To the eastward.'

"Orders were at once given to change the course of the vessel, and to
make for the stranger. As soon as she saw us she made every effort to
get away, but the Red Rover was too swift for her. When we got within
a short distance, I made out the vessel to be the Sally Ann, which had
left port about the time the Peregrine did. I knew some of those on
board very well, and the captain was an old school-mate of mine.

"'What would they think,' I couldn't help saying to myself, with a
groan, 'if they knew their old messmate was regularly enrolled among
the crew of the pirate that is overhauling them?'"




                                 XXII.

                     HOW TO ESCAPE FROM A PIRATE.


Bill Sturdy paused to take a whiff at his pipe, and then resumed his
story, in which Charlie manifested no slight interest.

"I was taken all aback," he continued, "when I found it was the Sally
Ann I was expected to join hands with the pirates against. I couldn't
help thinking of the many pleasant hours I had spent on board that
vessel, chatting and spinning yarns with the crew. What to do I didn't
know.

"The pirates were already clearing for action, and all seemed as busy
as bees. You ought to have seen the eager look there was on their
villainous faces, as they watched the Sally Ann, just, for all the
world, like a crafty spider, lying in wait for a fat fly.

"Just then the captain came up to where I was standing, and fixed his
sharp glance on me. 'Now, my man,' said he, 'here's a chance for you
to distinguish yourself. That vessel will no doubt prove a rich prize.
Do your duty, like a man, in the coming engagement, and you shall have
a good share of the spoils. If you don't, or if you prove false to us,
you know your fate.'

"He pointed up to the yard-arm, as much as to say that I should be
strung up, if I refused obedience, and I've no doubt he would have kept
his word.

"I just answered, 'Aye, aye, sir,' without looking particularly
concerned.

"'What will you do to the crew when the ship has fallen into your
hands?' I asked.

"'Send them to Davy Jones's locker,' he said, with no more compunction
than if he were speaking of a litter of kittens.

"Well, I felt as if I was in a pretty tight place; some like a man I've
heard of somewhere, who was being chased by a buffalo across a large
field. At last he came to a precipice a hundred feet high. Of course,
it would be death for him to jump off, and it would be just as much
death for him to stay where he was. So he just waited till the old
buffalo was close to him, and then he dodged out of the way, and the
buffalo, who was going at full speed, leaped over the precipice, and
was dashed to pieces. Well, I thought whether I couldn't do something
of that kind. I knew that, if I shouldn't fight, the pirates would be
as good as their word, and kill me, and if I did, I should be guilty of
piracy, and be liable to be hung as a pirate, if ever I got caught."

"That was a pretty hard choice," said Charlie.

"So it seemed to me," said Bill. "The only thing I thought of that
would do me any good, was to turn upon the pirates some way. If I
could only have jumped into the water, unobserved, and swam to the
other ship, I would have fought to the last, in their defence."

"Why didn't you do it?"

"Well, my lad, there were two objections. In the first place, the
pirates would have seen what I was at, and fired at me in the water. In
the second place, the sailors on board the Sally Ann, thinking that I
was a pirate, would have suspected I was up to some mischief, and so,
most likely, they would have blazed away at me, too. So, between the
two fires, I shouldn't have stood a very good chance."

"I don't know but you are right."

"No, my lad, it didn't take me very long to decide that there was
nothing to be gained in this way. At that moment, I chanced to go down
below for something, when my eye rested on--what do you think?"

"What was it?"

"_It was a keg of powder_," said Bill, shaking the ashes from his pipe.
"Perhaps, my lad, you can guess what thought that put me up to."

"Was it to blow them all up?" asked Charlie, in excitement.

"You've hit it, my lad."

"But that would be dangerous to you."

"I knew that well enough," said the sailor. "There was precious little
chance of old Bill Sturdy living to tell the story; but, my lad,
I'll tell you what made me overlook that. I must either turn pirate
and always remain so, with a pretty considerable chance of swinging
from the gallows some time, or else be butchered by the pirates for
refusing to join them. So, as there didn't seem to be much but death in
prospect, that consideration didn't weigh much. Then I thought that, if
I did die by the explosion, I should have the satisfaction of knowing
that the rascally pirates would share my fate, and the Red Rover, the
scourge of the seas, would never do any more harm. Besides that, I
should save the Sally Ann, and the lives of the captain and crew, and
that was something glorious to think of."

The boy's cheek glowed with sympathetic ardor, and he clasped Bill
Sturdy's rough hand, in token of understanding and appreciating his
motive.

"That seemed the only way open to me," resumed Bill, "and I determined
to adopt it. Of course, there were nine chances out of ten that I
should be blown up with the rest of them, but still there was a
possibility of escape. I couldn't help thinking of that, and the more
I thought, the more I had a kind of feeling that I should escape. I
thought I would go up on deck a minute, before carrying out my design,
and see what was going on. Well, the pirates had about got ready for
action. The decks had been cleared, the cutlasses and pistols and other
murderous weapons had been distributed among the men, and, altogether,
there seemed precious little chance for the poor fellows on board the
Sally Ann, especially, as I knew well enough that they had no cannon,
and only a few pistols, that were not likely to do them much good.
There wasn't much time to lose, as the action was going to commence.
So I slipped down below, and fixed a slow match, so that it would
reach the powder in about a minute. I had just about got it fixed,
when who should I see coming down, but the pirate captain. It seemed
as if all my plans were going to be knocked in the head. No doubt he
suspected that all was not as it should be, and was coming down to see
what was to pay. I felt desperate, and fetched him as powerful a blow
as I was able, on the side of his head, and he fell like an ox, pretty
effectually stunned."

"What next?"

"The next thing I did was to hurry upon deck. 'Where's the captain?'
asked the mate. 'He'll be up directly,' said I. And so he was, but not
in the sense that he understood it.

"Well, I listened on deck for about half a minute, in a terrible state
of anxiety, you may be sure. Then, feeling that it was not safe for me
to stay any longer, I jumped into the water, and began to swim towards
the Sally Ann. As my head rose above the water, I saw the mate about to
fire at me, and I dove. When my head was fairly out of water again,
such a sound as smote upon my ear! The light had reached the powder,
and there was a terrible explosion. The ship was shattered to pieces.
The pirates were hurled into the air, some with mutilated limbs, and
I rather think that some of them were considerably astonished. The
captain did go up as I promised. He was flung a hundred feet into the
air, and never came down again alive. For my part, I was lucky enough
to reach the Sally Ann, untouched by the falling fragments. When they
found out who I was, and how I had saved them, their gratitude knew
no bounds. The owners made up a purse of two thousand dollars, and
presented it to me."

"And what did you do with it?"

"When I got back to Boston, I put it in one of the places you call
Savings Banks, and I expect it's there now."




                                XXIII.

                            ANTONIO'S PLOT.


Such is a specimen of the yarns--sometimes true, sometimes spun out of
whole cloth--with which the sailors amused themselves and beguiled the
tedium of the night-watch.

The companionship of honest and stout-hearted Bill Sturdy proved a
great source of happiness to Charlie, and enabled him to bear up, as
otherwise he might have found it difficult to do, under the hardships
of his condition, the persecution of the captain and the mate, who had
not forgotten their animosity, and the uncertainty he could not but
feel as to the situation in which his mother was left, with the painful
doubt as to whether she would be able to support herself till he could
return and relieve her necessities.

"When we get back, my lad," said Bill Sturdy, "I'll put half that money
in the Savings Bank in your name, so that if you and your mother want
it at any time, you can use it."

"No, Bill," said Charlie, earnestly, "you are very kind, but I couldn't
consent to that."

"And why not, my lad? What do I want of it? I've got neither chick nor
child, and am not likely to have. I've taken a fancy to you, and the
money'll do you more good than me."

"You are _very_ kind," said Charlie, gratefully; "but I mustn't take
advantage of your generosity."

"Nonsense, my lad. I know what it is to be a poor boy, without money or
friends, and nowadays money will bring friends. Mayhap it'll start you
in some business, and when you get rich you can pay me; or if, by and
by, I take a notion to come to anchor on shore, you'll give me a corner
in your house, where I can smoke my pipe and spin my yarns."

"That I will, Bill," said Charlie, seizing the old sailor's rough hand.
"If I have a roof to cover me, it shall cover you too."

"Thank you, my lad," said Bill. "I know you would."

Under Bill Sturdy's rough exterior there was a kind heart which warmed
to our young hero, partly because of his solitary position on board,
partly on account of his manliness and attractive qualities. So they
became fast friends.

Charlie did not find his duties altogether distasteful. He was a
bright, active boy, not without ambition, and resolved to do himself
credit in his new position, however it may have been forced upon him.
For this reason it was that the captain and the mate, although they
watched him with lynx eyes, hoping that he would afford them some
pretext for showing their rancorous feelings towards him, watched
ineffectually. By his activity, and his frank and manly disposition,
he was fast ingratiating himself with the crew, who were the more
disposed to espouse his cause, because they could not fail to notice
the injustice with which the officers treated him.

But trouble was brewing for Charlie, and soon the storm broke forth.

The scuffle between Bill Sturdy and Antonio, of which Charlie was the
occasion, will not have been forgotten. Antonio had before hated Bill
on account of his superiority in strength, which deprived him of his
former champion's life. This feeling was increased by the issue of the
contest which had resulted in his humiliation and defeat, and his anger
was also stirred up against Charlie, who had been the occasion of it.
Yet he did not dare to venture upon abuse, because it was generally
understood that Bill Sturdy had constituted himself Charlie's especial
friend and protector.

But there were other ways of compassing his end. Antonio was subtile.
He felt that his revenge must be a more secret one, and he desired that
it should involve both Bill Sturdy and his _protégé_. If he could only
involve Charlie in some offence which would draw upon him the active
displeasure of the captain, and subject him to public punishment,
he felt sure that Bill Sturdy would not stand tamely by and see it
inflicted, while any interference would be insubordination, and get his
rival into serious trouble.

After reflection Antonio decided to implicate Charlie in a charge of
theft. It happened that the captain had a valuable gold ring, set
with diamonds, which, for reasons unnecessary to state, he prized even
beyond its pecuniary value. Captain Brace, however, was not a careful
man. He would sometimes take off his ring, and lay it down on the cabin
table. On one occasion Antonio, while upon deck, observed the captain
pass, and ascertained by a swift glance that the ring was not upon his
finger. He watched his opportunity, and slipping down into the cabin,
found, as he anticipated, the ring upon the table. It was the work of a
moment to snatch and conceal it in his pocket.

He returned to the work in which he had been engaged, and resumed it,
supposing he had not been observed.

In this he was mistaken.

Bill Sturdy had had his eye upon him from the time of his difficulty
with him. He could see Antonio's craftiness in his face, and the
apparent affability and conciliatory manner of the latter afterwards
had by no means deceived him.

"Look out for squalls," thought he. "He's too fair seeming to be
trusted. I've no doubt he's hatching up something or other. I'll keep a
sharp lookout for him."

When Antonio made his stealthy visit to the cabin, as above described,
the vigilant eye of Bill Sturdy was upon him and his movements.

In a moment he reappeared. Bill saw it all out of the corner of his
eye, though he appeared to be looking in just the opposite direction.

"What's the fellow up to?" he thought. "Some mischief, I reckon. What
business has he in the cabin? I must watch him."

Of course, Antonio's object will be understood. He meant to place the
ring in Charlie's chest, and when the loss should be discovered by the
captain, he would suggest that a general search should be instituted,
the result of which must involve our young hero.

Charlie was, of course, quite unconscious of the machinations which
were being formed against him, and even Bill was not yet quite certain
for what purpose Antonio had made his visit to the cabin.

Antonio felt the necessity of doing quickly what he had in
contemplation.

Going below, he made his way to the chest belonging to our hero, and,
lifting the cover, for it was unlocked, let the ring drop into one
corner.

Bill Sturdy saw his second disappearance from the deck. He could not
ascertain precisely what he was doing, without following him,--a
thing which he did not wish to do, since it would arouse Antonio's
suspicions, and place him on his guard.

Antonio came up with an expression of malicious satisfaction, which
Bill did not fail to notice.

"I wish," he thought, "I knew exactly what the fellow has been doing."

Bill was destined to learn ere long.

The captain went below, and glanced carelessly at the place where he
remembered to have left the ring. To his surprise, it had disappeared.

"What can have become of it?" he thought.

He instituted a careful examination, but did not succeed in finding the
lost article.

He prized it beyond its actual value, which was considerable, and began
to feel alarmed. It occurred to him that he might have been mistaken
about leaving it on the table. It might possibly have been dropped upon
deck.

Going on deck, he communicated his loss to the crew and requested a
general search.

"I think, Captain Brace," said Antonio, officiously, "that I can guess
where it is."

"Where?"

"I saw that boy have it," pointing to Charlie.

"It's a lie!" exclaimed Charlie, surprised and indignant.

"We'll see about that," said the captain, with a sneer. "Do you know
what he did with it, Antonio?"

"I think he may have hidden it in his chest."

"Let his chest be brought on deck, and publicly examined. If he is
found guilty, he shall be punished, as sure as my name is Brace."




                                 XXIV.

                      CHARLIE GETS INTO TROUBLE.


Charlie, at first taken by surprise when the charge of theft was
brought against him, now looked scornfully indignant. Ignorant of the
ways of the world, and the wickedness of which some men are capable, he
never, for a moment, feared the result of the investigation. As for the
crew, they had already become interested in his favor, and now pitied
him for the unfortunate position in which he found himself placed. None
of them believed him guilty.

As the captain had directed, his chest was brought on deck.

Before this was searched, however, he was subjected to a personal
examination, at which nothing was discovered. There was a murmur of
satisfaction.

"The lad never stole the ring," said a stout seaman, standing next to
the real perpetrator of the crime, Antonio.

"Don't be too sure of that," said the Spaniard, in a malignant tone.
"His chest hasn't been searched yet."

"I don't care for that; I can tell by his face. A lad, with such a
figure-head as that, wouldn't do anything mean or dishonorable."

"You seem to have taken a great fancy to him," sneered Antonio. "You
mustn't trust too much to appearances. He looks to me as if he were
guilty."

Charlie's cheeks were flushed, but not with shame or confusion. It was
indignation, that he should be suspected of such a disgraceful crime.

By his side stood Bill Sturdy, who took an opportunity of whispering
into his ear, "Never you mind, my lad, even if the ring is found in
your chest."

"But it isn't there," said Charlie.

"It may be," said Bill, who, by this time, suspected the nature of
Antonio's two errands below.

"How should it be there?" asked Charlie quite in the dark.

"It might have been put there, my lad."

"But who could put it there?" persisted our hero, but little
enlightened.

"Hark you, my lad," said Bill, still farther lowering his tones;
"you've got more than one enemy on board this ship."

"The mate?"

"Yes, and the captain too, for that matter."

"But neither of them would put the ring in my chest."

"No, probably not."

"Then who would?"

"There is another enemy besides these two."

"Do you mean Antonio?"

"Yes."

"But he seemed friendly lately."

"He isn't to be trusted, my lad. He's borne a grudge against both of us
ever since I got the better of him the other day, and he's made up his
mind to be revenged. I've been watching him when he didn't suspect it,
and know more than he thinks I do."

"Do you know anything of this affair, Bill?" asked Charlie, looking up
hopefully into the face of his friend.

"I expect I do."

"What is it?" questioned our hero, eagerly.

"I shall save it till it will do some good. But see, they have nearly
finished searching your chest. Perhaps the ring is not there after all."

As Bill said, the search was nearly completed. Charlie's clothes had
been unceremoniously tumbled out upon deck, which was not calculated
to improve their appearance, and the captain and mate, who had shown
themselves particularly active on the occasion, were peering about in
search of the lost ring.

It chanced, however, that the ring had got in a fold of one of the
shirts which lay upon deck. Of course, therefore, the search in the
chest proved unavailing.

"I doubt whether it is here," said the captain, in a tone of
disappointment.

"Let us look a little longer," said the mate, who could not so easily
resign the chance of getting into trouble the boy whom he hated with a
malevolence such as his nature was capable of.

Antonio became alarmed at the prospect of all his plans being
frustrated by a failure to find the ring.

When the mate also gave up the search, he came forward, and, addressing
the captain, said,--

"Captain Brace, if you will let me assist in the search, perhaps I can
succeed in finding it."

"You are the one that saw the boy have it, are you?" queried the
captain.

"Yes, sir."

"How long since?"

"About half an hour."

"Why did you not mention it at the time?"

"I thought perhaps he had only picked it up, and would give it back to
you," said the Spaniard, in some confusion. "I didn't want to charge
him with the theft till I felt sure he meant to steal it."

"And what makes you feel sure he did so intend?"

"Because when you said the ring was lost, he did not come forward and
restore it."

"Ay," said Captain Brace, "that is strongly against him. If it is
found that he has concealed it anywhere, he shall repent it, by----"

It is unnecessary to stain our pages by printing the oath with which he
emphasized this assertion.

"What reason have you for supposing that he concealed it in his chest?"
asked the mate.

"Because I saw him go down below," answered Antonio, with unblushing
falsehood.

"It's a lie," said Charlie, boldly. "I haven't been below this morning."

"Silence!" thundered the captain, scowling menacingly; "don't add
falsehood to theft."

"I haven't been guilty of theft," said Charlie boldly.

"Silence!" again thundered the captain, "or it will be the worse for
you."

"You had better not say anything more, my lad," whispered Bill Sturdy;
"we shall yet bring you off with flying colors. Don't you fear. Bill
Sturdy is your friend, and he will stand by you."

Charlie looked grateful.

When his statement had been so unequivocably denied by our hero,
Antonio suffered himself to look at him for one instant, but in that
brief glance was concentrated so much of spite and venom and malice,
that the boy could not help shuddering, as if the countenance of a
fiend had been unexpectedly revealed to him.

"I think, Captain Brace," said Randall, "that we may venture to let
Antonio assist us, since he may succeed where we have failed."

"Very well," said the captain, "I have no objection to offer. On the
contrary, if he succeeds in finding it, I will take care that he shall
be rewarded."

Antonio was already on his knees before the chest. There was a murmur
of disapprobation among the crew. They were in favor of fair play,
and this undue eagerness to convict our hero of guilt did not commend
itself to their sense of justice and generosity. But Antonio cared
little for the sensation which his conduct might excite among his
fellow-seamen. He cared more for the gratification of his revenge than
for personal popularity.

A glance satisfied him that the ring was not in the chest. He next
began to examine carefully the clothes which had been taken out and
were lying on deck.

In lifting and shaking a shirt the ring rolled out.

"_There is your ring_, Captain Brace," said he, in a tone of
exultation, as he picked it up and extended it to the captain.




                                 XXV.

                    THE REAL CULPRIT IS DISCOVERED.


The discovery of the ring made a profound impression upon all present.
The sailors looked at first surprised, and then sorrowful, for they
could not escape the conviction that Charlie had been tempted by the
richness of the prize and had actually stolen it.

Charlie was overwhelmed with astonishment and indignation, and the
thought that he was considered guilty made him feel very uncomfortable.

The captain, the mate, and Antonio could hardly conceal the
satisfaction which this discovery afforded them. Each had motives
of his own, the captain being, of course, glad to recover an article
which he valued, but of the three perhaps there was none that felt a
more malicious satisfaction than the one who had devised the plot. He
glanced exultantly at Charlie and Bill Sturdy, who he knew would be
equally affected by his favorite's misfortune.

Bill Sturdy returned his glance composedly. Antonio was disappointed
to find that he neither looked disturbed nor frightened. Bill waited
calmly the course of events.

Captain Brace exclaimed in his harsh voice, "It seems we have a thief
on board. We'll soon teach him the way all such rascals will be treated
on board this ship. Boy, take off your jacket."

"Captain Brace," said Charlie, with glowing cheeks, and in a tone that
might have convinced any one not prejudiced against him, "just hear
what I am going to say. I didn't steal your ring, indeed I didn't. I
would scorn to do such a thing. Ever since I could speak my mother has
taught me how mean a thing it is to take what belongs to another. I
own that appearances are against me."

Here Randall stepped forward with an evil smile upon his face.

"Captain Brace, as I am the uncle of this boy, perhaps you will allow
me to tell you how much dependence can be placed upon his word. He is
an artful young rascal. I am sorry to say it, since he is related to
me, but the fact is, he was on the point of being arrested for theft
just before we sailed, when I, to protect him from imprisonment, and
snatch him from the custody of the law, took him to sea with me. I have
said this against my will, because, although I know you, Captain Brace,
would not be imposed upon by his story, I thought there might be others
that would."

The sailors looked at each other, not knowing what to think, while the
captain exclaimed, sternly, "So this is not the first of your tricks,
my fine fellow. You shall have justice done you on the sea, if not on
the land. Strip, I tell you."

Charlie was so thunderstruck by Randall's bold falsehood that he
actually had nothing to say. He mechanically began to take off his
jacket.

At this moment the clarion voice of Bill Sturdy was heard, as, hitching
up his trousers a bit, he left the mast against which he had been
leaning, and advanced into the midst of the assembled sailors.

"Captain Brace," he said, in a tone firm but respectful, "if you'll
allow me, I'll tell you what I know of this affair."

"So you know something about it, do you?"

"I thought so," said Randall, in a low voice, for he had disliked Bill
from the first.

"I do," was the composed reply, "but I have no reason to be ashamed of
what I do know."

"I think," said the mate, "we already know all that we require, since
we have discovered the thief."

He was apprehensive, from Bill's tone, that what he had to say might
put a different face on the matter, and perhaps clear Charlie.

Captain Brace, however, did not choose to be guided by the implied
advice of his first officer. He had a curiosity to learn what Sturdy
had to communicate.

"Say on; what do you know of this affair?"

"Very well, sir. About an hour ago you came up from the cabin and began
to pace the deck."

The captain assented.

"As you passed I observed one of the crew take a hasty glance at your
finger. I looked also, and saw that you were not wearing your ring as
usual."

"Well?"

"The sailor that I mentioned just now."

"Who was he?"

"I would rather not mention his name just at present, unless you insist
upon it."

The captain did not insist, and Sturdy proceeded.

"I thought I would just keep my eyes open, and see what followed.
Pretty soon the sailor I spoke of looked about him to see if he was
unnoticed, and crept slyly down below. A little later he came up and
went to work again."

"Was that all?"

"It was not," answered Sturdy. "He kept at work about ten minutes
longer, and then stole towards the forecastle with the same secrecy as
before. I should have followed him down, but I thought he would notice
me. My mind misgave me that he was in some mischief. I determined I
would remember what happened, and if anything turned up, I should know
how it came about."

"And what do you make of all this?" said Randall, sneering. "To my mind
it is a foolish story, and, even if true, amounts to nothing."

"I'll tell you what I think, and am about sure of, Mr. Randall," said
Bill, without betraying a particle of excitement, but continuing to
speak with the same calm composure as before, "I believe that man in
the first place stole the captain's ring, and then went and put it into
the lad's chest, in order that it might be found there, and the guilt
fixed on him."

This assertion made a sensation among the crew, and there was a general
feeling that Charlie was innocent.

"Who is this man of whom you have been speaking?" said the captain.

"I don't need to name him," said Bill. "I don't need even to look at
him. If you will look around you, Captain Brace, you can tell by his
looks who the man is that has hatched this wicked plot against an
innocent boy."

Instantly the eyes of all, as if by some common impulse, were fixed
upon the form of Antonio, who, confused, thunderstruck by the minute
detail of his movements, which he had supposed unnoticed by any one,
now stood with his face alternately flushing and paling, looking the
very picture of confession and detected guilt.

Unable to bear the glances fixed upon him, he exclaimed, in a voice
hoarse with passion, "It is false. I never did it."

"No one has accused you that I know of," said Bill Sturdy, coolly.
"Leastways, nobody that I know of, excepting yourself, and your face is
enough to do that. However, I don't mind saying that you are the man I
mean. If Captain Brace will take the trouble to remember, you are the
first one that thought of searching for the ring, and told him falsely
that you had seen it in the hands of that lad there. Then again, when
the chest had been searched, and the ring couldn't be found, you came
forward and offered to look for it yourself, and finally you did find
it. That's all I've got to say, only, if you are not the real thief I
am a liar, and so is that face of yours."

Carried away by his rage, Antonio, forgetting the prudence which his
past experience might have taught him, threw himself suddenly upon Bill
Sturdy, and nearly succeeded in laying him prostrate upon the deck.




                                 XXVI.

                           A STORM BREWING.


Antonio's assault was so unexpected that Bill Sturdy, being, of course,
quite unprepared for it, staggered and seemed about to fall. But, as
one who slips upon the ice instinctively makes an effort to preserve
his equilibrium, so Sturdy immediately recovered from the momentary
disadvantage, and seizing Antonio with both hands threw him to the deck
without any great apparent effort.

Probably if Antonio had gained the advantage, Captain Brace would have
been in no haste to put a stop to the conflict. As it was, his brows
knit with anger as he exclaimed, in a stentorian voice,--

"Stop this fighting, you lubbers! Don't you know better the respect
which is due to my presence, you--rascals! I'll let you know that I am
not to be insulted on my own deck."

"It wasn't a fight of my seeking, Captain Brace," said Bill, coolly. "I
ain't disposed to be quarrelsome, and I guess he won't want to try it
again immediately."

As he said this he glanced at Antonio, who, sorely bruised by the fall,
was slowly rising from the deck, and slinking away with a crestfallen
and malignant look. Had he not been moved by an uncontrollable impulse
of rage and disappointment, he would scarcely have ventured upon this
open attack, knowing, as had been incontestably proved, that he was no
match for the Herculean strength of Bill Sturdy.

"Silence!" roared the captain, in answer to Bill's vindication of
himself. "One would think from your manner that you were the captain of
this ship instead of me."

"If I were the captain," said Bill, bluntly, "I'd have that man,"
pointing to Antonio, "put ashore at the first port. I wouldn't harbor
such a rascal aboard the ship."

"Silence!" again thundered the captain. "Don't you know your place? If
you don't, by all the saints in the calendar, I'll make you know it
before twenty-four hours have passed over your head. Let me tell you
that I don't require any help in commanding this vessel. When I do, I
will call on you. Till then, you may keep your advice to yourself."

Bill shrugged his shoulders, but thought it prudent, on the whole, to
say nothing. Not that he feared for himself. He had a good deal of
confidence in the strength with which nature had endowed him, but he
feared that any unguarded words of his might incite the captain and
mate to visit new hardships upon his young _protégé_, Charlie.

"As to the matter of the ring," said the captain, "my mind is not made
up. Mr. Randall, will you attend me?"

The mate went below with Captain Brace.

After a moment's silence the captain said, "I don't like that fellow,
Mr. Randall."

"Do you mean Antonio?"

"No; this Sturdy, who takes such airs upon himself."

"Neither do I," answered Randall, promptly.

"He's a mutinous rebel. I can see it in his eye," pursued the captain.

"I have no doubt he would be if he had a good opportunity."

"Perhaps I shall give him one," said the captain, significantly.

"He's as strong as a bull," said the mate.

"Yes; the fellow has fists like sledge-hammers, but he may use them
once too often. We will speak of that hereafter. Now what do you think
of this robbery?"

"I suppose Antonio was the thief," said Randall, reluctantly.

"You think Sturdy's story is correct?"

"Yes; Antonio is a deep rascal, though of the two I hate Sturdy most."

"Did you suppose your nephew to be the thief before the latter told his
story?"

"I did not."

"Yet you countenanced the charge."

"Because I thought a flogging would do the boy no harm."

"You don't seem to have any great affection for your nephew."

"I do not."

"And the reason?"

"Is simply this. The boy's mother jilted me, or rather refused me
outright when I offered my hand in marriage."

"Ha, that's where the shoe pinches."

"You are right."

"Well, I don't care to interfere with any little private revenge you
may desire to take, as long as it chimes in with my own purposes. The
boy shall be flogged if you wish it."

"I do."

"Find some pretext then, as long as the charge of robbery won't serve."

"Then," said Randall, "you might announce that, although the charge of
theft had not been sustained, he had been guilty of an offence that
called for punishment--insolence to his officers."

"That is a good idea. And in regard to Antonio----"

"I have no doubt the rascal stole the ring, and deserves punishment,
but I don't want him flogged, as it would gratify Sturdy too much."

"My own feeling."

"You can say that you have been unable to determine who is guilty in
the matter, and shall wait for further evidence."

"Very well conceived, Mr. Randall. I shall follow your advice, and
thank you for it."

"I am glad to have been of service to you, Captain Brace."

"And now, Mr. Randall, if you will go on deck, I will be up presently."

The mate reappeared on deck with a satisfied air, occasionally looking
with a glance of triumphant spite at Charlie, who was standing beside
his tried and trusty friend, Bill Sturdy.

"You don't know what's in store for you, my lad," he muttered. "Pity
his mother could not be here to see his fair flesh quivering under the
keen lash. Her heart would feel every stroke. She might repent then,
the scorn with which she repelled the suit of John Randall. How I hate
that boy! He brings up his father before me. So much the better. When
he shrinks beneath the lash, I shall think it is my old rival upon whom
it is falling."

Bill Sturdy, meanwhile, said in a low voice to Charlie, "I don't like
the looks of the mate this morning. He's hatching mischief of some
kind, if I'm not greatly mistaken."

"Against us?"

"That's what I mistrust, my lad; against one or both of us. He hates us
both, and I ain't quite sure which he hates the most."

"And yet I never did him any injury."

"Then he's done you some harm, depend upon it. People hate worst those
they have injured most, and he's done you a great wrong in stealing
you from home."

"What do you suppose made him do that, Bill?"

"He had some private reason; there ain't a question about that. It
wasn't because we were in want of a boy. We might have picked up plenty
that would have been glad to come."

"I'm afraid you'll get into trouble with him for taking my part," said
Charlie, with some anxiety.

"Don't trouble yourself about me," said Sturdy, shrugging his
shoulders. "I ain't in any way frightened by his black looks, and if he
tries to do you any mischief, he'll find you've got one friend."

Before Charlie had an opportunity to reply, Captain Brace came on deck,
and looked around him with a glance that showed a storm was brewing.




                                XXVII.

                               THE LASH.


"Pipe all hands to see punishment inflicted," ordered Captain Brace.

Charlie and Bill Sturdy looked at each other, uncertain where the blow
was to fall.

"It must be Antonio," thought our hero.

Evidently Antonio was of the same opinion, for over his swarthy face
there stole a pallor which showed his apprehension.

Such was the understanding of the crew also, as they could think of
no other wrongdoer. Little pity was excited in behalf of the supposed
sufferer. He had so abused his position when champion of the crew,
that he had forfeited the good-will of all; and even if this had not
been the case, his treacherous and mean attempt to bring Charlie into
trouble would have been sufficient to bring him into disfavor.

The uncertainty as to the victim was dissipated by the captain's next
words.

"Jack Randall, come here!"

Charlie came forward.

"Boy," said Captain Brace, sternly, "you were guilty of insolence to me
this morning. This shall never go unpunished while I am in command of
a vessel. As to the ring, you may or may not have stolen it. It rests
between you and Antonio. As it cannot be proved of either, neither will
be punished on this account."

Antonio's sallow face lighted up with joy at this unexpected escape, a
joy which was not reflected on the faces of the crew.

"It is for insolence, therefore, and not on account of theft," pursued
the captain, "that I sentence you, Jack Randall, to a dozen lashes on
the bare back. Off with your jacket!"

Charlie was a brave boy, but the prospect of this ignominious
punishment caused his check to pale and his voice to tremble, as he
exclaimed, "Captain Brace, if I have been guilty of insolence or want
of proper respect to you, it was not intentional. Do not compel me to
submit to this disgraceful punishment."

There was a movement of sympathy among the crew, and more than one
heart softened at the sight of Charlie's manly front, though his lips
quivered, and pride alone kept back the tears from his eyes. Bill
Sturdy started, but checked himself, to hear what the captain would say
in response.

"It is too late," he said, coldly. "You should have thought of all that
before you indulged in insolence."

"But----"

"It is too late, I say," roared the captain, irritated. "Strip, you
young rascal, or you shall have some help about it, and that of a rough
kind."

It seemed as if all chance of escape was over for poor Charlie. But at
that moment Bill Sturdy pressed forward, and, hitching up his trousers,
as he was wont to do preparatory to speaking, said, in a distinct tone
of voice, "Captain Brace."

"Well?" said the captain. "What have you to say?"

"I should like to make a proposal to you, sir."

"A proposal," repeated the captain, mystified. "What am I to understand
by that?"

"It's just this, Captain Brace. You're the captain of this vessel, and
you've got a right to flog that boy, I suppose, according to the law.

"Of course I have," said the captain, fiercely. "Do you presume to
question that right?"

"I don't think proper to question it just now," said Bill; "but,
Captain Brace, just look at that boy. Look at his bright, honest face,
and you can't have the heart to abuse him."

"Abuse him!" exclaimed the captain, stamping on the deck in his fury;
"say that again, and I'll have you flogged with him."

"It was something of that kind that I was going to propose," said Bill
Sturdy.

Captain Brace stared at him in astonishment, a feeling which was shared
by the crew.

"If you want to be flogged," said the captain, grimly, "we will try to
accommodate you."

"It is in this way that I mean," exclaimed Bill. "I've taken a liking
to that lad, and I've promised him I'll stand his friend. Now, Captain
Brace, if somebody must be flogged, spare him, and flog me in his
place."

Surprise was depicted on every face, and the sunburnt and rough-visaged
men about him felt an involuntary thrill of respect and admiration,
as Sturdy manfully came forward and offered his own back to the
punishment, which is properly regarded as an insult to manhood, though
the disgrace attaches not to the one who endures, but to the one who
inflicts it.

Charlie was the first to speak. His generous heart revolted at the idea
of escaping punishment at the expense of his friend.

"No, Bill Sturdy," said he, manfully, "I don't want you to suffer in my
place. It'll be hard to bear it," and his lip quivered; "but it would
be weak and cowardly for me to let anybody else suffer in my place."

Charlie began to take off his jacket.

There was a murmuring among the crew, testifying to the excitement
which they felt.

"Put on your jacket, my lad," said Bill. "I'm older and tougher than
you, and I can bear it better."

And the stout seaman pulled off his shirt, and displayed his brawny
shoulders, and a chest whose breadth and depth betokened a strength
which could not be styled less than Herculean.

Antonio looked on, his eye blazing with vindictive joy. Whichever was
flogged, his satisfaction would be equal.

"Hark you!" exclaimed Captain Brace, interfering at this juncture. "I
think that I shall choose to have a voice in this matter. So you wish,"
turning to Sturdy, "to relieve this boy of his punishment, do you?"

"I do," said the old seaman.

"I don't want him to," interrupted Charlie. "It is mine, and I will
bear it."

"It seems the parties are not agreed," said the captain, sardonically.

"Spare him," said Bill Sturdy, his eyes resting affectionately on
Charlie. "He is so young."

"Perhaps the best way in which I can please you both is to divide the
punishment between you. I had sentenced this lad to receive twelve
lashes. Since you wish to do him a service, you shall receive six, and
he the other six."

"I do not consent," said Sturdy, comprehending the captain's purpose to
humiliate both. "If his back is to receive a single lash, my offer will
not save him from the disgrace, and that is worse than the pain."

At this juncture the mate whispered something in the captain's ear.

The face of the latter lighted up with satisfaction, and his next words
revealed the nature of the mate's suggestion.

"I consent to the substitution," he said, and then paused.

Bill Sturdy's face glowed with generous satisfaction, and with heroic
forgetfulness of self, he began to strip for punishment.

A moment, and his back, broad and ample, was bared and the thick,
corded muscles could be seen.

"Antonio, come forward," said Captain Brace.

Antonio advanced amid the general surprise of the crew, and somewhat to
his own, and stood still, awaiting orders.

"Now," said Captain Brace, his tone showing his malignant satisfaction.
"I appoint you as my deputy to administer twelve lashes to this man;
mind that you don't spare him."

Antonio did not need this injunction. His eyes were full of fiendish
triumph, as he seized the instrument of torture, and flourished it
above his head.

As for Bill Sturdy, when he knew that Antonio was to be employed to
inflict punishment upon him, this refinement of torture shook his
resolution for a moment. It was, indeed, the bitterest drop in the cup.
But not for an instant did his resolution falter. He would save Charlie
at all hazards. He quickly recovered himself, and said, in a firm
voice, "I am ready."

Instantly the lash was whirled aloft, and buried itself in his flesh.

There was a quiver, and that was all.

One--two--three--four--

In fast succession the blows fall upon his flesh, he meanwhile standing
firmly braced, though his cheek was paler than its wont.

Charlie's heart sickened, and he closed his eyes to shut out the
fearful spectacle.

As for Antonio, he seemed to revel in the task which had been assigned
him. His eyes fairly danced with baleful light, and he seemed almost
beside himself. It was this, perhaps, that led him to exceed by one
the strokes which he had been ordered to administer.

A moment after, and the lash was wrested from him by Bill Sturdy, who
threw him to the deck, with one powerful grasp tore the covering from
his back, and buried the lash which had scarred his own back in the
flesh of his late executioner who with face distorted with fright and
pain roared for mercy.

"That is to pay for the blow you struck on your own account, you
scoundrel," exclaimed Sturdy. "And now," as the lash descended once
more with prodigious force, and the victim fairly writhed under it,
"you are one in my debt."




                                XXVIII.

                           TWO CONFERENCES.


So strongly were the sympathies of the crew with Sturdy, more
especially since he had shown himself capable of such disinterested and
heroic self-sacrifice, and so decidedly were their feelings enlisted
against Antonio, who acted like a fiend rather than a man in the
execution of the welcome duty assigned him by the captain, that this
sudden turning of the tables, the summary revenge taken by Bill Sturdy
in return for the additional blow Antonio had inflicted, was greeted
with a triumphant shout from the sailors, which seemed to spring from
them spontaneously.

Captain Brace bit his lip, and Randall's face darkened with rage. They
felt that the humiliation which they had intended for Bill Sturdy had
recoiled upon the head of their own agent.

The worst of it was they could not prudently resent it. Antonio had
in the eyes of all been guilty of a glaring offence in exceeding his
orders, and had justly brought upon himself the punishment he had
received. However, the justice or injustice of the matter would have
weighed little with Captain Brace if he had not been assured that
it would not be safe for him to go further. The law, at the time of
which I am speaking, gave almost unlimited power to the commander of
a vessel over the lives and liberties of those who were placed under
him, yet most were aware that there was a point at which it was wise to
pause. At the commencement of the scene, there had been audible murmurs
among the crew, the significance of which the captain and mate would
understand. The habit of subordination, and the knowledge that this
was in a certain sense a voluntary act on the part of Bill Sturdy,
had prevented anything more, but if the captain had gone to greater
extremities, the consequences might have been serious.

Meanwhile Antonio picked himself up, smarting under the terrible wounds
which had been inflicted by the lash wielded with the whole of Bill
Sturdy's enormous strength. Indeed, although he had received but two
stripes, and his enemy thirteen, it may be doubted whether the pain
inflicted by those two were not equal to that of the greater number.

Antonio had slunk down into the forecastle to bathe his back and obtain
fresh clothes, for his shirt had been rent asunder. Bill Sturdy, on
the other hand, proceeded to attire himself on deck and went about
his work, without showing outwardly the pain which he must have been
suffering.

Captain Brace took no public notice of the retribution which had
followed the punishment. He didn't dare to act as he wished, and
therefore chose to pass it unnoticed. But an hour afterwards, as he sat
in conference with the mate, his fury burst the bounds he had imposed
upon it.

"Curse that fellow!" he exclaimed. "Is he forever destined to thwart my
designs? I felt that I could willingly have flogged him myself till
the last breath left his body."

"It is a pity Antonio ventured to exceed his orders."

"Yes, the fool was richly repaid for his act, but I could wish it had
been by a different hand."

"That extra blow gave Sturdy a pretext for his summary vengeance.
But for that his conduct could have been construed into mutiny and
disrespect to you."

"And then I might have put him in irons."

"You might do it now, but for----"

"But for the crew, you would say. That alone prevents me. The fellow,
unluckily, has secured their sympathy. Would that I could devise some
way for taking vengeance safely upon this rebellious scoundrel."

The mate leaned his head upon his hand, and gave himself up to
reflection. Something occurred to him, for lifting his head again, he
asked,--

"Have you ever been in Rio Janeiro, Captain Brace?"

"Never but once, and that some nine or ten years since."

"There are desperadoes in that city, as in others," pursued Randall,
fixing his eyes intently upon the captain.

"I do not quite catch your meaning, Mr. Randall."

"Men who are little troubled by conscientious scruples, but are willing
to undertake the most dangerous and illegal enterprises--_for small
consideration_.

"I begin to understand you now," said the captain.

"Shall I proceed?"

"Do so."

The mate rightly construed this into an intimation that his
proposition, though hinting at crime, would not prove distasteful to
the captain. This, knowing the character of his superior officer, did
not surprise him, and he proceeded.

"I think you apprehend my meaning, Captain Brace. This man is a thorn
in our sides. He is exerting a bad influence on board the ship. He is
undermining your influence with the crew."

"That is all true, Mr. Randall. What, then, is your advice in this
state of affairs?"

"My advice is, that this fellow _should be removed_."

"To a place better fitted for him," suggested the captain, with a grim
smile.

"Precisely so."

"And through the agency of such men as you have spoken of?"

"That is my proposition."

"It deserves thinking of. May I ask if you have any acquaintance among
the fraternity, or whether you have ever had any occasion to employ
their services?"

"I did on one occasion."

"Do you mind giving the particulars?"

"To you, no. Some years since I shipped as common sailor on board the
Porcupine, bound from New York to Rio. On the voyage one of the sailors
on several occasions insulted me, and I determined upon revenge. At Rio
I fell in with a desperate character, who for a comparatively small sum
engaged to do my bidding."

"Well?"

"There is not much to tell. One night this man was passing through
a narrow street, quite unsuspicious of danger, when he was suddenly
struck from behind by a bludgeon, and--_he never came back to the
ship_."

"Did no suspicion attach to you?"

"How should there? Who was to betray me? Not my agent, or in so doing
he would betray himself. This is the first time I have ever spoken of
it, but I am safe with you."

"Perfectly. You say the consideration was small."

"Fifty dollars only. I dare say the fellow considered himself well
paid. Besides he took whatever his victim had about him."

"Thank you for the suggestion, Mr. Randall. I will furnish the money,
if you will undertake the management of the business when we reach Rio."

"With pleasure," replied the mate, and he probably spoke the truth.

While this conversation was going on, Charlie in another part of the
vessel was commiserating Bill Sturdy on his injuries.

"And it was on my account, too," said the boy, regretfully.

"Better me than you, my lad," said the old sailor stoutly. "Don't
trouble yourself about that. It was my own free will, and if I had been
unwilling all the power of the captain couldn't have made me submit
to it. Besides there was one thing that repaid me for it all. Antonio
got something he'll remember to the latest day of his life, I reckon.
However that ain't what I want to say now. It's just this. I haven't
any particular inducements to stay aboard this vessel, and I've about
made up my mind to give them the slip at the first port we come to, if
you'll go with me."

"Where do we touch first?"

"At Rio, I surmise."

"I'm ready to go with you, Bill, whenever you say the word," said
Charlie, promptly.

"That's right, my lad."

And so the agreement was made.




                                 XXIX.

                     DANGER THREATENS BILL STURDY.


It is my intention to pass rapidly over the time which intervened
between the events which have been described, and the arrival of the
Bouncing Betsey at Rio Janeiro. Nothing happened of sufficient interest
to call for record.

As for our hero and Bill Sturdy, their position was, unquestionably,
more agreeable and less disturbed by incidents than before. This was
not owing to any change in the feelings of the captain and mate, but
in consequence of the iniquitous compact into which they had entered.
They felt secure of ultimate vengeance; they could, therefore, afford
to wait. Indeed, they felt that they should be more likely to secure
the end they had in view if, for the present, they should so act as to
lull asleep any suspicions which might be entertained of their agency
in the affair after it was over.

But Bill Sturdy was not deceived. He determined to keep his
"weather-eye open," as he expressed it, and be on the lookout for
squalls.

So the time passed.

It was a bright, tropical day. The thick garments which all had worn on
leaving port were laid aside, and every one was dressed in light and
thin attire.

"We shall probably reach Rio to-morrow, Mr. Randall," observed the
captain.

"Yes; if the present wind holds, there can be no doubt of it."

"And the little plan which we have been contemplating need no longer be
delayed."

Randall smiled acquiescence.

The wind held favorable, and the next evening saw them in port.

The captain and mate went on shore, leaving the vessel in charge of the
second mate.

We have nothing to do with the motions of the captain, but will follow
Randall, who, never backward in ill-doing, at once set about the
execution of his scheme.

Having been in the city before, he was well acquainted with
localities, and therefore was able to direct his steps at once to that
quarter where he felt he was most likely to meet the man he was in
quest of.

He entered a low drinking-saloon, and ordered a glass of liquor, partly
to gratify his taste, partly that while drinking he might have leisure
to look about him.

It was a low, square room, dark and unsightly, frequented evidently
by the lowest ranks only. At this time there was but one man present
besides Randall.

This man was tall, low-browed, with shaggy black eyebrows, and a
face on which villainy was stamped in Nature's plainest and most
ineffaceable characters.

"There's a man," thought the mate, "that will serve my turn, and, to
judge from his looks, will be troubled by no unnecessary scruples on
the subject."

Meanwhile, the other, lifting his eyes from the glass, had observed
his close scrutiny, and chose to take offence at it. He rose from his
seat, and, advancing towards Randall, observed, in a menacing tone, "It
appears to me, señor, that you are impertinent."

Randall understood the language in which this was spoken, and coolly
inquired, "How so?"

"You have been staring at me as if you had some particular object in
it."

"So I have," returned the mate, in the same tone as before.

"Explain yourself, señor, and if, as I mistrust, you mean to insult me,
I will make you better acquainted with my good knife," and he tapped
the knife significantly.

"It is an acquaintance which I do not court," said Randall, shrugging
his shoulders. "But it appears to me that it is not well talking
without something to moisten the throat. I shall be happy to have you
drink with me."

"I beg your pardon, señor, for my suspicions, which, I see, were wrong.
I see that you are a gentleman. Henceforth I will treat you as such."

"I thought you would learn to know me better," said Randall, filling
both glasses; "let me drink to our better acquaintance."

Both sat down very amicably. The glass had made them friends.

"I should like to ask your advice on a certain point," said Randall.

"I will give it with pleasure."

"I have an enemy--a deadly foe--whom I detest. What would you do if you
were in my place?"

"You say he is your deadly foe?"

"Yes."

"I would give him a passport to another world. That is my advice."

"And you would feel no compunctions?"

"No more than if I were crushing a spider."

"I will own, then," said Randall, "that I have thought of this, but it
is difficult for me to act in the matter."

"Then hire another to do it."

"Ah, if I could only find some brave man who would undertake the job."

"Well?"

"I would engage him to do it for me, if----"

"Well?"

"If we could agree upon the terms."

"You need seek no further for your man, then," said the stranger,
gulping down another glass.

"How is that?" asked Randall, pretending not to understand him fully.

"Because, you see before you one who is willing to undertake it."

"You?"

"And why not?"

"Certainly, there is no good reason."

"Now tell me about it."

"First, let us settle about the price to be paid."

"As you please."

After some little discussion this was finally fixed at sixty dollars.
For this paltry sum, added to the booty which he might find upon the
person of his victim, this miserable man was willing to commit one of
the worst of crimes.

"Now," continued the mate, "I must give you some directions which will
enable you to identify the person."

"Is he a sailor?"

"He is."

"On board what ship?"

"The Bouncing Betsey."

"Lying where?"

Randall indicated the wharf at which the vessel was moored.

"Now describe the man."

"He is rather below the common height, broad-shouldered,
extraordinarily strong; in fact such a Hercules that it will be well
for you to take him by surprise."

"This will make me equal with him," said the Brazilian, displaying his
knife.

"That and the darkness."

"When shall I be likely to meet him?"

"He will receive permission to come on shore to-morrow night," said
Randall. "You must be hovering about the vessel, and watch the sailors
as they come from the ship. When you see him, you will follow him."

"Trust me for that."

"And when all is over, and you furnish me evidence that you have done
the deed, the money shall be yours."

"I require a portion in advance. How do I know but you will play me
false?"

"My good friend, I should expect, in that case, to become your victim.
However, your request is reasonable. You shall have one third of the
sum stipulated in advance."

He placed twenty dollars in the hands of his companion, and, rising,
paid his score. He then betook himself to the ship, and, on the arrival
of Captain Brace, acquainted him with the result of his visit. The
latter expressed great satisfaction.

Meanwhile Bill Sturdy and Charlie were speaking of the plan they had in
view,--that of escaping from the ship.

"Suppose," said Charlie, "we cannot obtain permission to go on shore
together."

"Then I will come to the wharf at midnight, and you can leave your bunk
unobserved and join me."




                                 XXX.

                          THE PASS OF DEATH.


"Have I permission to go on shore, Captain Brace?" inquired Bill Sturdy
on the following morning.

"I shall require your services on board during the day," said the
captain, acting in accordance with the suggestion and arrangements of
the mate. "At nightfall you can go if you like."

Charlie, learning from Bill Sturdy, the result of his application, did
not prefer a request till evening. His request was unceremoniously
refused. The Captain had no desire that our young hero should be
present at the assault upon Bill, as his presence might prevent the
attack being made, and its success, in consequence of Sturdy's great
strength, depended on its unexpectedness.

"Never mind," said Bill, in a low voice, "wait till midnight. Meanwhile
I will be seeking out a proper place of concealment. When the Cathedral
clock strikes midnight, rise quietly and take a bundle of clothes, if
you can do it unobserved, and jump upon the wharf. I will be waiting
for you."

Cheered by this hope, Charlie was content to wait.

He went below, and opening his chest, put together in a bundle the
clothes which he had on when he went on board the vessel for the first
time. His little preparation having now been made, he sat down and
commenced a letter to his mother which it was his purpose to mail in
the city, to be completed when the result of his attempt to escape
should be known.

We must now follow the movements of the villain with whom Randall had
conferred. He had no idea of failing to carry out his part of the
contract. Aside from the pecuniary inducement, his savage temper and
utter want of principle, made him rather court such adventures, even
for their own sake. Just before nightfall he stationed himself at a
point on the wharf where he would have an opportunity of observing all
that went on board the vessel.

With his keen eyes he scrutinized the forms of the sailors with a view
of verifying Randall's description, and so picking out the one who was
destined to be his victim. Circumstances conspired to lead him to a
wrong conclusion upon this point.

Bill Sturdy was, at that time, below, making preparations to go on
shore. It has already been remarked, that previous to his enrolment
among the crew, Antonio had been, physically the most powerful among
them. Although inferior to Bill Sturdy, yet he possessed a formidable
amount of strength, and on board most vessels might have challenged
comparison with any. But if Antonio was one in a hundred, Sturdy was
one in a thousand. Seldom, very seldom, is there concentrated in the
human frame so much power as he possessed. He would not have been found
unequal to the feats of strength which have made famous the name of
Richard Cœur de Lion, the English king, who won, in so remarkable a
degree, the chivalrous respect and affection of the English people, and
whose feats still live in the pages of the greatest of modern romances.

Antonio was, in form, not altogether unlike Bill Sturdy. At all events,
the resemblance was so great that the mate's description of Sturdy
might easily be supposed to apply to him. Hence, when the Brazilian
cast a scrutinizing glance over the persons of the crew, he at once
selected Antonio as the one intended.

"That is the fellow," he muttered. "He looks powerful, but my good
knife will prevent his being dangerous to me, provided I steal upon
him from behind, and give him one sharp, decisive blow."

Bill Sturdy was not the only one permitted to go on shore that evening.
Several others had similar permission extended to them, leaving behind
only enough to keep the proper watch on board the vessel.

A company, including Antonio, left the vessel together some five
minutes before Bill Sturdy made his appearance. The Brazilian, fixing
his attention upon him, followed them at a little distance, cautiously
avoiding the appearance of doing so, lest he might attract observation.
He did not expect to carry out his design at present, partly because
it was not yet dark, and partly also because he wished to wait till
Antonio was alone. He was resolved to keep him in view, for hours, if
need be, until a favorable opportunity should present itself for the
commission of the crime he meditated.

The first place the men visited was a low drinking saloon, situated
on a street considered hardly reputable. It was not long before they
became noisy and drunk.

One by one they staggered out of the drinking-saloon. Among the last to
go was Antonio. He had probably drank more than any of his comrades,
but he had a strong head, and showed his potations less in his gait
than many of the rest. He walked out with a steady step, somewhat to
the disappointment of the Brazilian, who had been keeping vigilant
guard, and relied upon the effects of the liquor to make him an easier
conquest.

It was already dark, but the street was too public, and he would be too
liable to interruption and detection to make it prudent to attack at
present. He therefore cautiously followed Antonio, hoping that he would
presently turn into some narrow lane or alley.

In this hope he was not disappointed. At a little distance there
was a narrow alley leading from the street in which Antonio was now
walking to another of equal size. Antonio stood a little doubtful at
the entrance, but finally entered. If he had only known that there was
one close upon his heels, who was tracking him with the keenness of an
Indian upon the trail of his foeman, he might have hesitated before
entering what, to him, was destined to prove "the pass of death."

But he did not know this.

The alley was a long one, little frequented at that hour, and
unlighted. Cautiously behind the doomed sailor walked the hired
assassin. And now Antonio is nearly midway. Between them there is a
distance of fifty feet. Over this interval creeps the murderer with
noiseless feet. Then, snatching the ever-ready knife from his girdle,
he lifts his hand, and the descending knife is buried in the back of
Antonio, entering just below his neck. He sank to the ground with a
convulsive shudder, and a sharp cry of pain.

The Brazilian stood over him. Antonio looked up into his face,
supposing it might be Bill Sturdy, whose enmity he judged by his own.

And the thought came to him.

Half lifting himself from the ground with his last remaining strength,
he ejaculated, feebly, "Were you hired to do this?"

"I was," said the assassin, briefly.

Antonio could have but one thought as to the one who had instigated
the murder. He was satisfied it was Bill, and that thought made death
doubly bitter.

With a curse upon his lips, a bitter malediction upon his rival, he
died.

Quickly stripping his victim of whatever he had about him worth taking,
his murderer crept away.




                                 XXXI.

                    CHARLIE'S ESCAPE FROM THE SHIP.


Randall had made an appointment to meet his agent at midnight at the
place where they originally met.

Some ten minutes before the hour he entered, and found the Brazilian
seated at a table with a bottle before him.

"I am here first," said the latter, nonchalantly, as he laid down a
glass which he had drained.

"So it seems," said Randall. "And now, what success?" he asked, eagerly.

"The best."

"You have----"

"I have earned my reward."

"Good!" exclaimed the mate, his eyes flashing with revengeful malice.

"And now," said the assassin, coolly, "I am ready to receive my pay."

"You shall have it as soon as you prove to me that you have stated the
truth."

"Do you dare to doubt my word?" said the Brazilian, fiercely.

"Not at all."

"Why, then, do you demand this proof? Have I not told you?"

"Because," said Randall, "you must know, that in this matter I am the
agent of another, and that the money with which I pay you is not mine,
but only what he has intrusted to me."

"Well?"

"You will easily understand that, though I may be perfectly satisfied
with your assurance, he is a different person. He has never met with
you, and may very reasonably require some proof that the deed has been
done."

"Would you know the hair of this man?" asked the Brazilian.

"I should."

He drew from his bosom a lock of hair which he had severed from the
head of his victim.

Randall looked at it eagerly, turned pale, and uttered an exclamation
of mingled surprise and dismay.

"You have made a great mistake," he said.

"A mistake?" echoed the other.

"Yes," said Randall; "you must have killed the wrong man!"

"What makes you think so?"

"Because the hair should be sandy. This is black."

"Beware," said the assassin, suspiciously, "how you attempt to trick me
out of my reward. The knife which has drunk the blood of one can, on
occasion, do the same thing for another."

"Your suspicions are unjust," said the mate. "In any event, you are
welcome to what you have already received, and we must enter upon a new
contract for the other."

"Umph!" muttered his companion, but half appeased.

"And now let us go and see who has been the victim of this unlucky
mistake."

Together they proceed cautiously to the alley where the sailor yet lay,
cold and rigid, his face wearing the look of dark, sullen hatred and
ferocity which had been habitual to it in life.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Randall. "This is Antonio."

"Is it not the man you intended?"

"No; it is his deadly foe. But what a fearful look he wears in death.
Was there any struggle?"

"No; he had no chance."

"You did not kill him instantly?"

"He had time to ask a question."

"What was it?"

"He asked if I had been hired to murder him."

"And you answered----"

"Yes."

"Did you tell him by whom you were hired?"

"I had no opportunity. He had just strength to ask the question, and
then died."

"He supposed it to be another," said Randall. "But it can't be helped,
and we may as well leave this place, or we may incur suspicion. I don't
know that I care much for the mistake. He was an ugly fellow."

"About the other?"

"If you will be on the wharf to-morrow morning, I will take care that
the man is on deck. You could not fail to recognize him, but to avoid
all mistake, I will go forward and speak to him."

"And am I to receive no more than twenty dollars for what I have
already done?" asked the Brazilian, discontentedly.

"Did you take nothing from the corpse?"

The assassin had found considerable money, and the thought of this
tended to appease him.

"You are welcome to that, whatever it is, and for the new enterprise
you shall have as much as I promised in the first place. You see,
therefore, that you will be a gainer by the mistake that has taken
place, while I shall be out of pocket by it."

"You said you were but an agent."

"So I am, but this money will come from me."

Here the two villains parted company, one betaking himself to his
ship, the other returning to the drinking-saloon, where he spent the
remainder of the night in drunken revelry.

In the meantime the man against whose life Randall had plotted
unsuccessfully was preparing another disappointment for the mate.

On leaving the ship, not dreaming how important to him had been the ten
minutes by which his comrades had preceded him, Bill Sturdy struck for
the central part of the city by the most direct route.

Turning a corner, he unexpectedly fell in with a sailor who had been
a messmate on a former voyage. Bill ascertained that his comrade was
about to sail in two days for Liverpool, and from thence to New York.

"Can your captain take another hand?" asked Sturdy.

"I have no doubt he would like one, for we are short-handed. We lost a
sailor overboard just before we got into Rio."

"Do you carry any passengers?"

"A few."

"I shall want to secure a berth for one."

"You don't mean to say, Bill, that you've been spliced?"

"Not quite so bad as that. The passenger is a boy."

"A son of yours?"

"I wish he was," said Bill, earnestly; "but I'll tell you more about
this matter another time. For the present, keep dark. And that reminds
me, can you tell me of any quiet, decent place where the lad and I can
come to anchor?"

"I know of a widow woman who will give you good rooms."

Bill took down the address.

Toward twelve o'clock he returned to the wharf at which the vessel was
lying. While he was standing in the shadow of a large building the
cathedral clock struck twelve.

A moment after, and a youthful form appeared upon deck, descended the
side swiftly, and stepped on the wharf.

"Here I am, my lad," said Sturdy, in a low voice, coming out from his
place of concealment.

"I was afraid you wouldn't be here," whispered Charlie.

"Trust me for that. And now we must be making sail, or the pirates will
be after us."

And this is the way Charlie took leave of the Bouncing Betsey.




                                XXXII.

                            FIRST LESSONS.


We will not attempt to depict the rage and vexation of Randall and the
captain when they ascertained that Bill Sturdy had made his escape from
the vessel and taken Charlie with him. For they entertained no doubt
from the previous intimacy of the two that they had deserted the ship
in company. They instituted as strict a search as they were able, and
even offered a reward to any of the crew who should be instrumental in
bringing back either, but particularly the boy. None of the sailors,
however, would have betrayed our hero, even if they had had the
opportunity. Captain Brace was finally obliged to put to sea without
those whom he was so desirous of getting back into his power. He was
compelled at the last to ship two new hands in place of Bill Sturdy and
Antonio.

As for Bill Sturdy, he embarked on the Liverpool-bound vessel. He was
desirous that Charlie should go as passenger, offering to pay his
fare, that he might be spared the hardships of a boy on board ship.
But to this arrangement our hero strongly objected. He said he had no
intention of being idle, and as to the hardships, he was willing to
encounter them. Bill, therefore, withdrew his objections, and Charlie
became one of the crew. He soon became a favorite, and as the captain
and mate were quite different in character and disposition from those
of the Bouncing Betsey, his voyage proved much more pleasant and
satisfactory.

We must now take leave of our young hero, well assured that he is in
good hands, and, transferring the scene to Boston, inquire into the
fate of our friends there.

It will be remembered that Mrs. Codman, after the abduction of her son,
was successful in obtaining the post of governess to a rather playful
and mischievous young lady, the only daughter of a wealthy merchant
named Bowman.

Mrs. Codman found her pupil as playful as a kitten, and about as
fond of study. To confess the truth, Miss Bert Bowman was deplorably
ignorant for a young lady of her age. Her governess, however, soon
ascertained that it was from no want of natural capacity, but rather
because she had been so much indulged, that nothing had been required
of her beyond what the young lady chose to perform, and that was
exceedingly little. In a private conversation with Mrs. Codman, Mr.
Bowman explained the deficiencies of Bert with their cause, and went on
to say, "Now, my dear madam, I wish to surrender Bert to your charge
entirely. I feel assured that I may rely upon your judgment to adopt
such a course as may be best adapted to reconcile her to study, of
which at present, she has a great dread. I would not counsel too great
strictness at first, though I do not apprehend that from you. Neither
perhaps ought we to try to advance very rapidly at first. Step by step,
will be the most judicious way. In regard to hours, text-books, and
studies generally, you will do as you think best."

"I thank you, Mr. Bowman," replied Mrs. Codman, "for your dependence
on my judgment, and hope to deserve it. I hope my young pupil, who, I
am convinced is not wanting in intelligence, will do justice to her
natural capacity."

The next day Mrs. Codman commenced her undertaking, for such it may
appropriately be called.

"Bertha," said she, pointing to the clock, "it is nine o'clock. Suppose
we commence our studies."

"Just let me have another race with Topsy," said Bert, who was flying
round the room in pursuit of the black kitten, who was evidently
regarded by her young mistress as a congenial companion.

"I am afraid I must say no, my dear child," said Mrs. Codman gently;
"there is nothing like punctuality. So if you will just ring the bell,
I will ask Jane to take away Topsy for the present."

"Can't Topsy come to school with me?" asked Bert, disappointed.

"I am afraid if she did my other pupil would not make very much
progress."

Bert unwillingly acquiesced in the dismission of her favorite companion.

"You won't keep me as long as they do in school, will you, Mrs.
Codman?" asked Bert. "If I had to study four or six hours, I should
certainly go into a fit."

"I dare say you would," replied her teacher, smiling. "Therefore
I sha'n't keep you so long. In fact, as you are the only scholar,
we sha'n't bind ourselves to so many hours, but rather to so much
learned, so that it will depend a good deal on how well you study."

"That's good," said Bert. "Only, Mrs. Codman, you mustn't be too hard
upon me. I don't believe I can get very long lessons."

"I mean to be quite easy at first. I shall not ask much, but that
little I shall be strict in requiring."

Bert wasn't quite sure how she liked the latter part of this remark.

"Before setting you any lessons, I must find out how much you know."

"I guess it won't take me long to tell you all I ever learned."

"Here is a reading-book. Let me hear you read."

Bert took the book, and stumbled through a paragraph, invariably
mispronouncing all words of over one syllable.

"There," said she, taking a long breath; "I'm glad that is over."

"Now," said Mrs. Codman, taking the book, "let me read it aloud."

She was an excellent reader, and Bert, though she could not read
herself, recognized the fact.

"I wish I could read as well as that," said Bert. "How awfully you must
have studied when you were a girl."

"Not so hard as you think for, perhaps," said her teacher, smiling.
"Success depends more upon a series of small efforts, than any great
one."

"Do you think I shall ever read well?" asked Bert doubtfully.

"I am sure you will, if you will give a moderate amount of attention.
Do you know anything of arithmetic?"

"Do you mean the Multiplication Table?"

"Yes, that is a part of it."

"Yes," said Bert, "I know some lines about it. Charlie Morrill taught
me them one day."

"What are they?"

Bert repeated these lines, which no doubt are familiar to many of my
readers:

    Multiplication is vexation,
      Division is as bad,
    The rule of Three doth trouble me,
      And Practice makes me mad.

Mrs. Codman smiled. "Perhaps you will like them better as you grow
better acquainted. Can you tell me how much are four times four?"

Bert went through a variety of motions in counting her fingers, and
finally announced as the result of her computation, that four times
four made twenty-nine.

"That is hardly right."

"I'm awful ignorant, ain't I?" asked Bert.

"Considerably so, I confess. But we shall be able to remedy that."

"You won't make me study my eyes out?"

"That would be a pity. You see mine are not yet gone, and I don't mean
to ask you to study any harder than I did."

Bert looked at the eyes of her teacher which were quite as bright as
her own, and lost her apprehensions on that score.

"I'll tell you why I asked," said she, after a pause. "There's a girl
that goes to school--she's only twelve years old--and she has to wear
spectacles, and I heard somebody say it was because she studied so
hard. I shouldn't want to be obliged to wear spectacles."

Mrs. Codman could not forbear laughing at the idea of her frolicsome
little scholar, with a pair of glasses perched upon her nose, and
promised her that if she found there was any prospect of her being
obliged to wear them, she would advise her at once giving up study.

"Then I hope," thought Bert, "I shall need them soon."

"Now," proceeded Mrs. Codman. "I am going to give you short and easy
lessons in reading, spelling, and arithmetic. It won't take you long to
get there, if you only try. When you have recited them, we are to go
out and ride in the carriage."

"Oh, that will be nice," exclaimed the child. "Tell me what the lesson
is, quick."

The lessons were got and said sooner than could have been expected, and
so Bert had taken the first step in ascending the hill of learning.




                                XXXIII.

                        A LETTER FROM CHARLIE.


Bert had plenty of capacity. She could get her lessons in an incredibly
short time when there was any inducement. At other times she would sit
for two or three hours with the book before her, but with her attention
straying to other things, and, as a natural consequence, would know no
more at the end of that time than at the beginning. Fortunately Mrs.
Codman had the gift of patience, and though she was gentle, was, at the
same time, firm.

Of one thing Bert became convinced,--that study was not so terrible
as she had imagined. At the end of three months she had made so great
an improvement, that her father was equally surprised and delighted,
and was disposed to do full justice to Mrs. Codman's merits as a
governess. "Who knows but you will become quite a learned lady in time,
Bert?" he said, playfully.

"No doubt of it, papa," replied Bert. "By the time I am eighteen, I
expect to wear green glasses and write books."

"That will, indeed, be a miraculous transformation. And what is to
become of Topsy, then?"

"Oh, she'll be an old cat then, and won't feel any more like racing
round than I do. She'll just curl up in a chair beside me, and I will
use her fur to wipe my pens on. She is just the right color for that,
you know."

"Quite a sensible plan. I confess. Indeed, it will be well for you to
have something of that kind to be employed about, as you will probably
have no beaux."

"No beaux, papa? And why am I to have no beaux, I should like to know?"

"Because it takes two to make a bargain."

"Well, perhaps I sha'n't," replied Bert, tossing her head. "Perhaps you
don't know that I have picked out my future husband."

"Whew! That is getting along faster than I had anticipated. May I be
permitted to know who is to be my son-in-law? I think I can guess,
however."

"Who?"

"Mr. Bradley."

Mr. Bradley was an old bachelor, of about fifty, partially bald and
more than partially homely, who had now and then dined with Mr. Bowman
and had taken more notice of the young lady than she at all desired.

"Mr. Bradley!" repeated Bert, in a contemptuous manner. "I'd a good
deal rather marry Topsy."

"Perhaps," suggested her father, "the superior length of the kitten's
whiskers causes you to give her the preference. Am I to understand that
she is your choice?"

"No, it is a very handsome boy, and his name is Charlie Codman."

A look of regret stole over Mrs. Codman's face--the expression of a
sorrow caused by her uncertainty with regard to Charlie's fate.

"A son of yours?" asked Mr. Bowman, in some surprise.

Mrs. Codman replied in the affirmative.

"You ought to see his miniature, papa. He is very handsome."

"And you have lost your heart to him. Perhaps he may not return the
compliment."

"I hope he will," said the young lady.

"Perhaps Mrs. Codman will allow me to look at the miniature of my
future son-in-law," said Mr. Bowman, not guessing the mother's sorrow
and its cause.

While Mrs. Codman was absent from the room, Bert gave her father a
brief account of Charlie's disappearance.

"You must pardon me, Mrs. Codman," said Mr. Bowman, in a tone of
feeling, when she had returned, "for speaking in the lively tone I did.
I little guessed the anxiety you must feel about your son. Is this the
miniature?"

"A very attractive face!" he said. "I don't wonder at Bert's taking a
fancy to it."

"I cannot wonder at your sorrow in losing, even for a time, such a boy
as this face seems to indicate," he added.

"You think there is a chance of his coming back to me?" asked Mrs.
Codman, anxiously.

"I am hardly prepared to express an opinion on the scanty information
which Bert has been able to give me. If you are willing to tell me the
story in detail, I will tell you what I think of the chances."

Mrs. Codman told the story, mentioning, also, the name of Peter Manson,
and the language which he had used.

"I sometimes see this man," said the merchant, "and know him by
reputation. He is a miser."

"He pretends to be very poor."

"All pretence. I do not see what object he could have had in spiriting
your son away."

Further conversation followed, but, as might be expected, no
satisfactory result was reached. Mrs. Codman, however, felt relieved
and more hopeful in the knowledge that her employer knew of her loss,
and would do what he could to discover Charlie.

It was only a week later that he came into the school-room with a smile
upon his face.

"Father, you bring good news; isn't it so?" said Bert.

"I hope so."

Mrs. Codman looked up with a glance of eager inquiry.

"As I took up the morning paper," said the merchant, "my eyes, by
chance, ran down the list of advertised letters. Recognizing the name
of Mrs. Codman among them, I took the liberty of sending to the office
for it. It is post-marked at Rio Janeiro."

"Oh, give it to me quick!" exclaimed Mrs. Codman, in agitation.

"Is it from Charlie?" asked Bert.

"It is, it is!" exclaimed the happy mother, as she recognized the
familiar handwriting; and too impatient to unseal the letter, she tore
it open and devoured the contents.

It was the letter which Charlie had commenced on shipboard. We will
give the greater part of it.

  "DEAREST MOTHER,--

"I hope this letter will reach you in safety, and will relieve you of
some of the anxiety you must have felt about your wandering boy. You
will start with surprise when you see where this is dated. I am three
thousand miles from you, dear mother, but not by my own act. But I
must tell you how I came to leave you. (This portion of the letter is
omitted.) You mustn't think I have suffered all the time on board the
ship, though it is hard work, and, for some reason, the captain and
mate have both been my enemies. I have had one faithful friend, to whom
I am very much indebted. He is a rough sailor, and neither educated nor
refined, but he has a warm heart, and has been very kind to your boy.
Indeed, mother, I don't know how much trouble I should have had, if it
hadn't been for honest Bill Sturdy. Some time I hope you will have the
pleasure of taking him by the hand, and thanking him for all he has
done for me. The greatest act of friendship for which I have to thank
him I will not write here, but I will tell you some time.

"As we were neither of us treated as well as we ought to be, we have
deserted the vessel, and transferred ourselves to a ship bound to
Liverpool, and thence to New York; so that it may be some months from
now before I see you again.

"I am so afraid you have suffered since I left you, not only from
solitude and anxiety about me, but have been compelled to labor beyond
your strength. You were so poorly paid for that horrid sewing, and had
to work so hard at it. But when I come back we will live together, as
we once did; and though it will not be a luxurious home, it shall be a
happy one. As you may have moved elsewhere, you must leave word with
those who occupy our old room where you live, so that when I come back,
which will be just as soon as I can, I may come at once to you, and
tell you how much I have missed you.

  "From your affectionate,

  "CHARLIE."

Knowing that Mr. Bowman felt a friendly interest in Charlie's welfare,
Mrs. Codman, her eyes dim with happy tears, handed him the letter,
which he read attentively.

"A very good letter," he said, "and very creditable to the writer. When
he returns, if you and he are both willing, I will receive him at once
into my counting-room. His letter is sufficient recommendation."

How differently the world looks according to the mood in which we view
it. No one could have convinced Mrs. Codman, after the reception of
this letter, that it was not a perfect paradise. The patient sorrow
which her face had worn the day before, gave place to a sweet and happy
expression, which made her look quite charming.

"Mrs. Codman is really a beautiful woman," thought Mr. Bowman, as
unobserved, he watched her laughing with Bert, glancing over the
newspaper which he was supposed to be reading.




                                XXXIV.

                       THE RETURN OF THE BETSEY.


It was a fine morning when the Bouncing Betsey, after a quick and
prosperous voyage from Valparaiso, entered Boston harbor. There had
been few or no changes on board since the ship left Rio Janeiro on the
passage out. Captain Brace is still in command, and unfortunately has
not at all mended his ways, but has richly merited, as he has obtained,
the general dislike of the crew, not one of whom will sail with him
again unless forced by dire necessity. Second in odium as he is in
command, comes Randall the mate. He cares little how he is regarded
by the men under him. To him the voyage has proved in some respects
a disappointment. He has not recovered from the vexation occasioned
by the escape of Bill Sturdy and Charlie. He has anticipated with
eagerness the return to Boston, where he hopes first to meet with the
deserters, and secondly intends to wrest a further sum from the fears
of Peter Manson.

Before visiting the miser, however, it is his intention to find out
what he can about Mrs. Codman, and how she has fared. He hopes in his
vindictiveness she has been reduced to the deepest distress, and the
hardest shifts to procure a livelihood.

He made his way to the tenement-house where Mrs. Codman formerly
lodged. He went up to the door of her former room and knocked, but it
was opened by a stranger, who could give him no information about the
person for whom he inquired.

Perplexed and quite at a loss to obtain a clew to the knowledge he
desired, he went back to Washington Street, and mingled in the busy
throng that crowded the sidewalks. He walked leisurely along, gazing
listlessly into the shop windows, but intent upon his own thoughts.

Chancing to let his eyes rest upon a passing carriage, he was startled
by the glimpse of a face which he was sure he knew. It was an elegant
carriage, drawn by two spirited horses, and evidently the equipage
of a person of wealth. A negro coachman in livery sat upon the box,
and wielded the reins with a dexterous hand. There were two persons
inside--one was a child of ten, a lively young girl, across whose face
a hundred changeful expressions flit. She was talking in an animated
strain to a lady with a beautiful and expressive face, who sat beside
her.

These two persons were Bert and her governess. The latter was looking
better than when she was introduced to the reader. Surrounded by
comforts and luxuries, and above all relieved from her most pressing
anxiety by the letter which she had received from Charlie, her cheeks
had recovered their wonted fullness and bloom, and the rare beauty for
which she had been distinguished in her youth.

Randall could scarcely believe his eyes. This was the woman whom he had
pictured to himself as struggling amid the deepest poverty to obtain a
scanty subsistence, worn out by harrowing anxiety for the loss of her
only son. What a contrast to his anticipations was the reality! He saw
her tastefully dressed--the picture of health and happiness--with the
same beauty that had dazzled him in times past, surrounded by evidence
of prosperity and luxury.

"What can it mean?" he thought in bewilderment. "Is it possible that my
eyes are deceived by an accidental resemblance?"

The carriage had already passed him, but as it was obliged to proceed
slowly on account of a press of carriages, he had no difficulty, by
quickening his pace a little, in overtaking it, and again scanning the
face whose presence there had filled him with so much surprise.

The first explanation which suggested itself to him as possible was,
that Mrs. Codman had attracted the attention of some wealthy gentleman,
who forgetting the distance which circumstances had established between
them, had laid himself and his fortune at her feet. But even then how
could she appear so lighthearted and happy unless Charlie had returned?
There was another supposition that old Peter Manson had died, and on
his deathbed, repenting his past wickedness and injustice, had repaired
the wrong of which he had been guilty, as far as he could, by leaving
all his possessions to Mrs. Codman. This was to Randall the most
disagreeable supposition of the two, for it would effectually stand in
the way of the designs which he cherished against the same property.

Determined not to lose sight of Mrs. Codman, he with considerable
difficulty kept pace with the carriage. It chanced that Bert and her
governess were just returning from a drive, otherwise they might have
led Randall a long chase. At present they were not very far from home.

From the opposite side of the street Randall watched them descend the
steps of the carriage, and enter the house. He paused long enough
afterwards to cross the street, note down the name of Bowman together
with the number, that he might be able to identify it hereafter. He
then examined the house itself with some curiosity. The appearance of
the house indicated clearly enough the wealth of the owner.

"I wish I knew," muttered the mate, "on what footing Mrs. Codman
resides here. She must either be the wife of the proprietor or his
housekeeper, one or the other."

At this moment an infirm old woman limped out of the side-gate, with a
basket slung on her arm.

Pressing forward, he accosted her.

"You seem heavily laden, my good woman."

"Yes," said she, "thanks to the good lady who lives in the house."

"What is her name?"

"It's Mrs. Codman. Do you know her, sir?"

"I am not sure. I once knew some one of the name. But there is a
different name on the door--Bowman."

"Yes, he is the gentleman of the house."

"And Mrs. Codman?"

"She is the young lady's governess."

"How long has she been there?"

"I don't know, sir."

"Never mind. It doesn't matter much."

"I wish I could tell you, sir."

"It's of no consequence at all, and you needn't mention that any
questions have been asked you. But I am afraid I have been detaining
you. Here is something to pay you for your trouble."

So saying he slipped half a dollar into her hand and, avoiding her
profuse thanks, walked hastily away.

"Now, for a visit to the miser," he said to himself.




                                 XXXV.

                    CHARLIE TURNS UP UNEXPECTEDLY.


There was but little variety in the monotonous life of Peter Manson.
His life was one struggle for gold, his thoughts were continually upon
gold; gold seemed to be the end and aim of his existence. But what did
he propose to do with it all? He was not an old man yet, but all the
infirmities of age were upon him.

Peter had not forgotten nor ceased to lament the heavy draft which
had been made upon him by Randall. The thousands which he had left
could not compensate to him for the one he had lost. So, in the hope
of making it up, he strove to live even more economically than before,
if, indeed, that were possible. The additional privations to which he
subjected himself began to tell upon the old man's constitution. He
grew thinner and weaker and more shrivelled than before, and all this
to save a penny or two additional each day.

As Peter was crawling feebly along towards his gloomy den one
afternoon, clad in the invariable blue cloak, he was startled by
hearing a hoarse voice behind him, calling out, "Peter Manson--Peter, I
say!"

"Who calls?" asked Peter, in a quavering voice, slowly turning round.

"Don't you remember me?" asked Randall, for it was he.

Peter muttered something unintelligible as he cast a terrified glance
at the mate, and quickened his pace.

"You're not very polite, Peter," said the other, quickly overtaking and
joining the old man. "Is this the way to greet an old friend, whom you
have not seen for nearly a year?"

Peter looked anxious and alarmed, and glanced askance at his companion.

By this time they had reached the miser's quarters, and Peter, taking
out a key, opened the door.

He opened it just sufficiently to admit himself, and was then about to
close it when Randall, unceremoniously pushing him aside, entered also.

"By your leave, Peter, I will spend a short time with you."

"I have no fire," said Peter Manson, hastily.

"I dare say not," said Randall, carelessly, "but you can easily kindle
one."

"I--I have no fuel."

"None at all?"

"Why, a little--a very little," stammered Peter, uneasily.

"I thought so. Come, lead the way. I won't trouble you to light the
fire. I'll do it myself."

With something that sounded like a groan, the old man led the way,
and ushered his unwelcome guest into the room described in one of the
earlier chapters.

Randall used as much wood in kindling a fire as would have lasted Peter
a whole day.

"You will ruin me," he said, in dismay.

"Then you'll be ruined in a good cause," said Randall. "But I say,
Peter, don't you remember what we talked about when I visited you last?"

The old man groaned, thinking of the thousand dollars.

"Seems to me it has not left a very agreeable impression upon your
mind," remarked his companion. "Don't you want me to tell you of the
boy that I spirited away?"

"Is he dead?" asked Peter, eagerly.

"No; curse him, he escaped from me."

"You--you didn't let him know about the money?"

"Which you feloniously kept from him? Was that what you mean?"

"Ye--yes."

"No, I didn't."

Peter looked relieved.

"Where is he now?"

"Heaven knows! I don't. He deserted from the ship at Rio Janeiro. But
let me ask you, in turn, Peter, what has become of the mother, whom
each of us has so much reason to hate?"

"I don't know."

"Then she is no longer a tenant of yours?"

"She moved in less than a month after you went away."

"Couldn't pay her rent, ha!"

"Yes; she paid it as long as she stayed. I have not seen or heard
anything of her since."

"I have," said the mate, significantly.

"You!" exclaimed Peter, eagerly.

"I saw her to-day."

"How--where?"

"In a carriage."

"A carriage!" echoed Peter, in surprise.

"Yes; looking as bright and handsome as when she rejected you with
scorn."

The miser frowned.

"Where did you meet her?"

"On Washington Street. I was walking there when I chanced to look into
a gay carriage that was driving by, and saw her."

"Are you sure you are not mistaken?"

"No. I followed her to her place of residence."

"Where is it?"

"No.----Mt. Vernon Street."

"She must be rich, then."

"No; she is a governess there, though enjoying, I should think, unusual
privileges, and is, no doubt, happy."

Peter made no reply, but seemed occupied by other thoughts.

"And now, Peter, have you any idea what I came for?"

"To tell me this."

"I am not fool enough to take all this trouble."

"Then I don't know."

"I want money, Peter."

Peter could not be said to change color, but he grew more ghastly than
before, at this demand.

"I have nothing to give you," he said.

"Tell that to the marines. You must give me another thousand dollars."

"Another thousand dollars!" exclaimed the old man. "Where do you think
I should get it? Did I not impoverish myself in satisfying your last
demand, and have I not been obliged to live on bread and water since?"

Randall shrugged his shoulders.

"I dare say you have lived on bread and water, but as to being obliged
to, that is nonsense. I ask you again, to give me a thousand dollars.
You will have thousands left."

"I shall be a beggar," said the old man, passionately.

"A beggar!" returned Randall, laughing scornfully.

"Yes," said Peter, with energy. "You promised, when I gave you
a thousand dollars,"--his voice faltered as he recalled the
sacrifice,--"that you would ask no more. Now, you come back for another
sum as large, and it is not yet a year. You shall not have it!" he
exclaimed, passionately; "not if I had it fifty times over."

"Bethink you what you are saying, old man," said Randall, menacingly.
"Do you know that I can go to Mrs. Codman and denounce you?"

"You will not," said Peter, trembling.

"But I will, unless you comply with my demand. Now what do you say?
Better be reasonable, and consent, before I compel you."

"Never!" exclaimed the miser, desperately.

"I will denounce you to the police. Shall I have the money?"

But Peter was no longer to be moved, even by his fears. His love of
money overcame every other consideration, and again he exclaimed,
"Never!" with all the energy of which he was capable.

"Is this your final answer?"

"It is."

"Then I will help myself," said Randall, coolly, leaving his chair, and
beginning to lift up the trap-door, beneath which was the miser's box
of treasure.

As soon as Peter fairly comprehended his design, and saw the gold coins
in the grasp of the purloiner, unable to restrain himself, he threw
himself upon the mate with a cry as of a lioness deprived of her young,
and grasped the strong man by the throat with fingers, which, though
naturally weak, despair and rage made strong. At all events, it was
not particularly comfortable, and provoked Randall, who seized the old
man in his strong arms, and, with a muttered curse, hurled him to the
floor, where he lay pale and senseless.

"Confusion!" muttered Randall, in dismay, for Peter had uttered a
shrill scream as he fell. "I am afraid I shall get into an ugly
scrape."

He was not altogether wrong.

The scream had been heard by two, at least, who were passing. The door
was burst open, and in rushed Bill Sturdy and Charlie, our young hero,
who had just returned to Boston, and were passing on their way up from
the wharf at which the vessel was lying.

"Mr. Randall!" exclaimed Charlie, in surprised recognition.

Randall strove to escape through the opened door, but Sturdy, seizing
him in his powerful grasp, cried, "Not so fast, my hearty! You've been
up to some mischief, and if I don't see justice done you, may I never
see salt water again!"




                                XXXVI.

                  HOW CHARLIE COMES INTO HIS FORTUNE.


Probably there were no two persons then living whom Randall at that
moment cared less about seeing than Bill Sturdy and our hero. Though
astonished beyond expression to see them there, his position was
too critical to allow him to waste time in giving expression to his
surprise.

"Let me go, you scoundrel!" he exclaimed, making a desperate effort to
elude Bill's grasp.

He might as well have striven to tear himself from the grasp of a lion.

"Not so fast, Mr. Randall," said Bill Sturdy.

"You mutinous scoundrel!" hissed the mate.

"You forget," said his captor, coolly, "that we are not now on the
quarter-deck. Here I am your equal, Mr. Randall, and perhaps you may
find me a little ahead."

"Let me go, if you know what is best for yourself," ejaculated Randall,
almost foaming at the mouth.

"If you know what is best for yourself," said Bill composedly, "I would
advise you to be quiet."

"And now," he continued, tightening his grasp a little, "just let me
know what mischief you have been up to?"

"I am not responsible to you," said Randall haughtily.

"Responsible or not, you must give an account of yourself."

"If you will let me go, I will make it worth your while."

"Do you think I am mean enough to accept a bribe?" exclaimed Sturdy,
with honest indignation. "Let me know what you have been doing."

"This old man!" said Randall, curbing his pride, "foolishly thought I
meant to rob him, and shrieked for assistance."

"Is that all?" asked Bill, keenly glancing at the box of gold. "Things
look as if you were going to rob him in reality."

"I am not in the habit of thieving," said Randall, haughtily.

At this moment the miser, who had been insensible, began to show signs
of returning consciousness.

"Go and get some water, Charlie," said Bill. "The old man looks as if
he might come to with a little help."

There was a pail half full of water standing near by. Charlie sprinkled
Peter's face, and a moment after he gasped and opened his eyes. He cast
a frightened glance from face to face till his eyes rested on Randall,
when he shuddered, and cried feebly, "Take him away, take him away! He
will rob me."

"Not while I am here to prevent him," returned Bill, in a tone of
assurance.

"You are friends, then?" said the miser, anxiously.

"Of course we are. Did this man attempt to rob you?"

"Take care not to make any false accusations, old man," said Randall,
menacingly.

"Speak the truth without fear," said Bill Sturdy; "I'll bear you out in
it. He can't do you any harm."

"He demanded a thousand dollars from me," said the old man, "and when I
would not give it to him he was going to help himself."

"What do you say to that, Mr. Randall?" asked Sturdy.

"I say this," said the mate, turning a malignant glance upon the miser,
"that it was a regular bargain--a matter of business. This man owed me
the money--he knows best what for, and refused to pay it."

"I did not," said Peter, hastily, "he had already been paid in full."

"Take care, Peter, or I may tell what it was for."

"I defy you," said the miser in a quavering tone of defiance. "You are
a bad man."

"Perhaps you don't know who this boy is?" said Randall.

"Who is he?" asked Peter, doubtfully.

"He is one who has reason to consider you his enemy," said Randall,
"even more than myself."

At this unexpected statement Bill Sturdy and Charlie looked at each
other in surprise.

"Do you know this old man, then, Charlie?" asked Sturdy, at length.

"Yes," said our hero; "it is Mr. Manson, of whom my mother used to hire
a room."

"The landlord?"

"Yes."

"And what harm has he ever done to you?"

"I don't know," said Charlie, shaking his head, "unless," and an
anxious look came over his face, "he has distressed her for rent since
I have been gone."

"Is that so?" demanded the sailor, sternly.

"No, no!" said Peter Manson, hastily. "She left my tenement a good many
months ago."

"And where is she now?" asked Charlie, eagerly--for, having just
landed, he knew nothing of his mother's whereabouts.

"Then you have not seen her?" asked Randall, with the sudden thought
that he might make better terms for himself by selling his knowledge on
the subject.

"No," said Charlie. "Is she well? Tell me, I entreat you, if you know."

"I do know," said Randall, composedly, "both where she is and how she
has fared."

"Tell me quick."

"That depend upon circumstances. While I am held in custody I have
little inducement to do you a favor."

"Sturdy will release you, won't you, Sturdy. Only tell me where my
mother is, that I may go to her at once."

"Why," said Bill, cautiously, "I don't know, exactly. He may be trying
a game, and giving us information won't be worth anything."

"You can keep me here till you have sent to ascertain if I have told
you the truth."

"No, no," said Peter Manson, terrified at the prospect, "don't let him
stay here. He would rob me."

"Rob you," sneered Randall; "it looks well in you whose money has been
dishonestly gained, to charge me with theft."

"He--you won't mind what he says, gentlemen," said Peter Manson,
trembling. "He only says it to spite me."

"To spite you! Yes, you old hunks, I will spite you, and that with a
vengeance! Hark you, Sturdy, I have kept this old man's secret long
enough, and though I hate you, and that boy there, I believe I hate him
worse. If I will reveal to this boy a secret which will insure to him
a property of from twenty to thirty thousand dollars, will you agree to
let me go, and give me a thousand dollars?"

"Can you do it?" demanded Sturdy, in surprise.

"I can."

"Well, it ain't for me to say, but if I were Charlie here I would close
with your terms."

"Don't you believe him," said Peter, terrified. "He is only making a
fool of you. He can't do what he says."

Charlie was not a little astonished at the turn affairs had taken.

"I shouldn't wonder," said Bill, "if there might be something in this,
as long as the old man seems so afraid the secret will be let out."

"You will find that I have told you the truth," said Randall; "tell me
quickly yes or no. If you decline, you will lose more than I shall."

"Then," said Charlie, "I will accept your terms so far as I am
concerned."

"And I'll bear witness to it," said Bill, "if you will carry out your
part of the agreement."

"That I will do to your satisfaction. The first thing to be explained
is, that in carrying this boy to sea I was only acting as the agent of
another."

"And that other!"

"Was Peter Manson--the man you see before you."

"It is false," said the miser, turning ghastly pale.

"Moreover," said Randall, "I was well paid for the service. I received
a thousand dollars."

"Oh, oh!" cried the old man, swaying backward and forward--"a thousand
dollars in bright gold, and I so poor."

"You see he admits it," said Randall.

"And what did he want Charlie carried away for?"

"Reason enough for that. He feared the boy might learn that it was his
wealth which he has been hoarding up."

"Mine!" exclaimed Charlie, in unbounded surprise.

"Did you never hear your mother speak of a certain Peter Thornton, who
by purloining and making off with twenty thousand dollars caused your
grandfather to fail?"

"Yes, often."

"_That man is Peter Thornton!_" said Randall, pointing with his finger
to the miser.

The latter half rose from his seat, and then, as if he had received a
mortal wound sank to the floor.

"You require no other confirmation of my words," said the mate.

"Why my lad, you will be a rich man," said Bill Sturdy, his face
beaming with satisfaction.

"How glad mother will be!" exclaimed Charlie. "Where is she, Mr.
Randall? I want so much to see her."

The mate gave Charlie briefly the information he required, and added,
"You will probably need my assistance to establish your claim to the
property of which yonder old man has so long deprived you. I shall hold
myself at your service, trusting to your honor to pay me the thousand
dollars agreed upon."

"You shall not trust in vain, Mr. Randall," said Charlie, promptly.
"Place me in possession of what is rightfully mine, and you shall have
no reason to complain."

"Very well, I shall stop at the Tremont House for the present.
There you or your lawyer will find me. I advise you to employ legal
assistance."

"I will do so, and thank you for the suggestion. As soon as I have seen
my mother I shall proceed to business."

Randall withdrew, but was quickly followed by Charlie and his friend.

"Where are you going, my lad?" asked the sailor.

"You needn't ask, Bill,--to see my best friend, my mother. It is for
her sake that I welcome this fortune. She shall never want any more
while I have money. We will have a nice little home, where you shall be
welcome, Bill, always and all the time."

Bill pressed the hand of our young hero in his own rough palm, and
there was a suspicious moisture about his eyes, but he said nothing.




                                XXXVII.

                           REUNITED AT LAST.


Mrs. Codman was sitting in a little room opening out from the
breakfast-room, which had been appropriated as a sort of study by Bert
and herself.

Topsy, the kitten, who had not yet attained the sobriety and demureness
of old cat-hood, was running round after her tail.

"Oh, dear," sighed Bert, who was puzzling over a lesson in geography,
"I can't study any to-day."

"Why not?" asked Mrs. Codman.

"Oh, I feel so restless."

"That isn't very unusual, is it?" asked her governess, with a smile.

"I feel more so than usual. Something is going to happen, I know."

"Something does happen every day, doesn't there?"

"Well, you know what I mean; something out of the way. I shouldn't
wonder if Charlie got home to-day."

"Heaven grant he may!" exclaimed his mother, fervently.

By a strange coincidence--and coincidences do sometimes happen in real
life, though not quite so often, perhaps, as in stories,--Mrs. Codman
had hardly given utterance to her wish when the bell rang.

Bert jumped from her seat.

"It is he, I know it is!" she exclaimed. "Do let me go to the door."

"You are very fanciful to-day, Bert," said Mrs. Codman. But she did not
forbid her going. Bert's earnestness had given birth to a wild hope on
her part, that it might be as she had fancied.

Before the loitering servant had a chance to reach the door, Bert had
already opened it.

Bill Sturdy and Charlie stood on the steps, Charlie looking handsome
and manly, with an eager look on his bright face. Sturdy, it must be
owned, looked and felt a little awkward, not being accustomed to call
as a visitor at houses as elegant as Mr. Bowman's.

"Oh! this is Charlie, isn't it?" exclaimed Bert, with childish delight,
instinctively putting out her hand.

"What, do you know me?" asked Charlie, pleased with this cordial
reception, but astonished at being recognized.

"Oh, yes."

"Is my mother here?"

"Yes; I will go and call her. But won't you come in?"

"I would rather you would call her," said Charlie, bashfully.

Bert danced back into the little study.

"I was right, Mrs. Codman," said she, triumphantly, "It is Charlie."

"Has he come?" asked the mother, precipitately, letting fall, as she
rose, the astonished kitten, who had clambered into her lap. "Oh, where
is he?"

"At the door."

Mrs. Codman waited for no more, but hastened to the door, and, in a
moment, the mother was face to face with her lost boy. Of the delight
of that meeting, of the numberless questions which each had to ask,
with what fond pride the mother noted the increased manliness of
Charlie, I cannot speak in detail. Both hearts were full to overflowing
with love and gratitude.

Meanwhile Bert was endeavoring, in her way, to entertain Bill Sturdy,
who, though no man was braver or more self-reliant among his comrades,
felt abashed in the presence of Bert, whom he looked upon as made of
finer clay than himself. And, indeed, the beauty and sprightliness of
the child made her look like a charming picture, and even Charlie's
eyes could not help straying to her, from time to time, while he was
talking with his mother.

Bill was perched upon an elegant chair, scarcely daring to rest his
whole weight upon it, for fear it might give way under him, swinging
his hat awkwardly in his hand.

"You are Bill Sturdy, are you not?" said Bert, determined to become
better acquainted.

"How do you know that is my name?" asked Bill, half fancying she must
have learned it in some supernatural way.

"Oh, Charlie wrote about you in his letter."

"Did his mother get a letter from him, then?"

"Yes; it was from some place with a hard name. I never can remember
those geography names."

"Was it Rio Janeiro?"

"Yes; that was it. What an awful time he must have had! Do you like
going to sea?"

"Yes, miss; I feel more at home on the sea than on the land."

"You do! Well, that's funny. I know I should be sea-sick, and that must
be horrid."

"Well, it doesn't feel very pleasant," said Bill, with a smile.

"Oh, Mr. Sturdy, did you ever see a whale?"

"Yes, miss, plenty of them."

"I suppose you never came near being swallowed by one--like Jonah, you
know?"

"No, miss; I don't think I should like that."

"What lots of adventures you must have had! You must stay to dinner,
and afterwards you can tell me of some."

"I don't think I could, thank you, miss, all the same," said Bill,
alarmed at the suggestion. "Not but I'd be glad to spin you a yarn some
time."

Just then Charlie bethought himself of his companion.

"Mother," said he, "you must let me introduce to you my good friend,
Bill Sturdy. You don't know how kind he has been to me."

"I am quite ready to believe it," said Mrs. Codman, holding out her
hand quickly.

Bill took it shyly in his.

"I thank you most heartily for all you have done for my dear boy," said
she.

"Anybody that wasn't a brute would have done as much, ma'am."

"Then I am afraid there are a great many brutes in the world."

Charlie stopped to dinner, but Bill could not be prevailed upon to
do so. "You see, my boy," he explained to Charlie, "it don't come
nat'ral; I shouldn't know how to behave. So I'll just go back to my
boardinghouse, and you'll find me there after dinner."




                               XXXVIII.

                            REACHING PORT.


Will the reader imagine a year to have passed?

During the time several things have happened.

In the first place, Mr. Bowman has invited Charlie to become a member
of his family.

In the second place, charmed by the beauty and grace, as well as the
more valuable qualities of Mrs. Codman, with whom he has had a good
chance of becoming acquainted during her residence in his family, he
has invited her to become his wife. Mrs. Codman was taken by surprise,
but found this proposition not altogether unwelcome. She had become
attached to Bert, who added her persuasions to those of her father, and
at length her governess promised to assume to her a nearer relation.

Through the testimony of Randall, the identity of Peter Manson with
Peter Thornton was fully established, and the law decided that the
miser's wealth must go to Charlie and his mother. It was found to
exceed the estimate which had been made of it, verging close upon forty
thousand dollars. Including interest for twenty years, all this, and
more of right, belonged to those who had so long been defrauded of it.

Mrs. Codman could not help pitying the miserable and disconsolate old
man, pinched with privation, which had enfeebled him, and made him old
before his time. She continued to allow him the use of the old building
which he had occupied so many years, and allowed him a certain sum
payable on the first of every month, to provide for his wants.

The sudden loss of the gold which he had been hoarding up so long did
not kill Peter Manson, but it affected his intellect. The habit of
avarice never left him. He saved up nine tenths of his allowance, and
starved himself on the remainder. Attempts were made to remedy this by
bringing him supplies of fuel and provisions, but these he economized
as before. One day, when Charlie looked in to see how he was getting
along, he beheld a sight which made him start back in affright.

The old man lay stretched out upon the floor cold and dead, with
a few gold pieces firmly clutched in his grasp. He had received a
sudden summons while engaged in counting over the little gold he had
accumulated from his allowance.

So ended the wasted life of Peter Manson, the miser.

From him we turn to others who have figured in these pages.

Randall received the thousand dollars which had been promised as
the reward of his disclosure. It appeared as if prosperity, rather
than retribution, was to attend him. He succeeded in obtaining the
command of a fine ship, with an excellent salary, and sailed with
fair prospects. But his tyrannical habits had not deserted him. His
unjustifiable abuse aroused the deadly anger of one of the crew, a man
of excitable temper, who, before he could be withheld, plunged a knife
into his heart one day, just after punishment, killing him instantly.

As for Captain Brace, he, too, demands a word. Brief mention will
suffice. In a fit of ungovernable rage he burst a blood-vessel, and he,
too, died instantly, without a moment's preparation, in which to repent
of the many wrongs he had committed.

From the sad fate of these miserable men we turn gladly to brighter
scenes.

Mrs. Codman, now Mrs. Bowman, has had no cause to regret her second
choice. Her husband commands her respect and esteem, and makes her very
happy. Charlie is now at an excellent school. After he has completed a
liberal course of instruction, he will enter the counting-room of his
step-father, where, as we cannot doubt, an honorable and useful career
awaits him.

As for Bill Sturdy,--honest, brave, stout-hearted Bill Sturdy,--he
could not be persuaded to abandon the sea, but now sails as captain of
a vessel belonging to Mr. Bowman. He is unboundedly popular with his
crew, whom he treats as comrades in whose welfare he is interested.
Whenever he is in port, Captain Sturdy dines once with Mr. Bowman. He
feels more at his ease now than when he was only a forecastle hand, but
he will always be modest and unassuming. He is a prime favorite with
Bert, and always brings her home something when he returns from foreign
parts.

It is not ours to read the future; but I should not be surprised, when
Charlie grows to manhood, if we should find Bert's early choice of him
as her husband prophetic.

So we bid farewell to Charlie Codman. His trials and struggles have
come early in life, but now his bark has drifted into smoother waters.
The sky above him is cloudless. His character has been strengthened by
his combat with adversity. Let us hope that his manhood may redeem the
promise of his youth, and be graced by all the noblest attributes of
humanity.


                               THE END.





End of Project Gutenberg's Charlie Codman's Cruise, by Horatio Alger

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLIE CODMAN'S CRUISE ***

***** This file should be named 54294-0.txt or 54294-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/2/9/54294/

Produced by Nahum Maso i Carcases and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

