The Project Gutenberg eBook, Cat and Dog, by Julia Charlotte Maitland,
Illustrated by Harrison Weir


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Cat and Dog
       Memoirs of Puss and the Captain


Author: Julia Charlotte Maitland



Release Date: March 21, 2007  [eBook #20868]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAT AND DOG***


E-text prepared by David Edwards, Christine D., and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page
images generously made available by the PALMM Project
(http://palmm.fcla.edu/) and the University of Florida



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original lovely illustrations.
      See 20868-h.htm or 20868-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/8/6/20868/20868-h/20868-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/8/6/20868/20868-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through the Florida
      Board of Education, Division of Colleges and Universities,
      PALMM Project (Preservation and Access for American and
      British Children's Literature). See
      http://fulltext10.fcla.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=juv&idno=UF00002985&format=jpg
      or
      http://fulltext10.fcla.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=juv&idno=UF00002985&format=jpg





CAT AND DOG;

Or,

Memoirs of Puss and the Captain.

A Story founded on Fact.

By the Author of

"The Doll and Her Friends," "Letters from Madras,"
"Historical Acting Charades," Etc.

Fifth Edition.

With Illustrations by Harrison Weir.







[Illustration: CAPTAIN AND THE LOOKING-GLASS. Page 9]



London:
Griffith and Farran,
Late Grant and Griffith, Successors to Newbery and Harris,
Corner of St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCCCLVIII.




NOTE.

The Author begs to assure her young readers that the principal
circumstances on which this little story is founded are true. The
friendship between the two animals, the dog's journey home, and return
in company with his friend, are facts which occurred within her own
knowledge.


  LONDON:
  SAVILL AND EDWARDS, PRINTERS,
  CHANDOS STREET.




CAT AND DOG;

OR,

PUSS AND THE CAPTAIN.


I am going to relate the history of a pleasant and prosperous life; for
though a few misfortunes may have befallen me, my pleasures have far
exceeded them, and especially I have been treated with such constant
cordiality and kindness as would not fail to ensure the happiness of man
or beast. But though I have no reason to complain of my destiny, it is a
remarkable fact, that my principal happiness has been produced by
conforming myself to unfavourable circumstances, and reconciling myself
to an unnatural fate.

Nature herself did well by me. I am a fine setter, of a size that a
Newfoundland dog could not despise, and a beauty that a Blenheim spaniel
might envy. With a white and brown curly coat, drooping ears, bushy
tail, a delicate pink nose, and good-natured brown eyes, active,
strong, honest, gentle, and obedient, I have always felt a conscious
pride and pleasure in being a thoroughly well-bred dog.

My condition in life was peculiarly comfortable. I was brought up in an
old manor-house inhabited by a gentleman and his daughter, with several
respectable and good-natured servants. My education was conducted with
care, and from my earliest youth I had the advantage of an introduction
into good society. I was not, indeed, allowed to come much into the
drawing-room, as my master said I was too large for a drawing-room dog;
but I had the range of the lower part of the house, and constant
admittance to his study, where I was welcome to share his fireside while
he read the newspapers or received visitors. I took great interest in
his friends; and by means of listening to their conversation, watching
them from under my eyelids while they thought I was asleep, and smelling
them carefully, I could form a sufficiently just estimate of their
characters to regulate my own conduct towards them. Though a polite dog
both by birth and breeding, I was too honest and independent to show the
same respect and cordiality towards those whom I liked and those whom I
despised; and though very grateful for the smallest favours from
persons I esteemed, no flattery, caresses, or benefactions could induce
me to strike up an intimacy with one who did not please me. If I had
been able to speak, I should have expressed my opinions without
ceremony; and it often surprised me that my master, who could say what
he pleased, did not quarrel with people, and tell them all their faults
openly. I thought, if I had been he, I would have had many a fight with
intruders, to whom he was not only civil himself, but compelled me to be
so too. I have often observed that it appears proper for human beings to
observe a kind of respect even towards persons they dislike; a line of
conduct which _brutes_ cannot understand.

However, I was not without my own methods of showing my sentiments. If I
felt indifferent or contemptuous towards a person entering the room, I
merely opened one eye and yawned at him. If he attempted any
compliments, calling me "Good Captain," "Fine Dog," and trying to pat
me, I shook off his hand, and rising from my rug, turned once round, and
curling my tail under me, sank down again to my repose without taking
any further notice of him. But occasionally my master admitted visitors
whom I considered as such highly improper acquaintances for him, that I
could scarcely restrain my indignation. I knew I must not bite them,
though, in my own opinion, it would have been by far the best thing to
do; I did not dare so much as to bark at them, for my master objected
even to that expression of feeling: but I could not resist receiving
them with low growls; during their visit I never took my eyes off them
for a moment, and I made a point of following them to the door, and
seeing them safe off the premises. Others, on the contrary, I regarded
with the highest confidence and esteem. Their visits gave almost as much
pleasure to me as to my master, and I took pains to show my friendship
by every means in my power; leaving the fireside to meet them, wagging
my tail, shaking a paw with them the moment I was asked, and sitting
with my nose resting on their lap.

But I took no unwelcome liberties; for I was gifted with a particular
power of discriminating between those who really liked me, and those who
only tolerated me out of politeness. Upon the latter I never willingly
intruded, though I have been sometimes obliged to submit to a
hypocritical pat bestowed on me for the sake of my young mistress; but a
real friend of dogs I recognised at a glance, whether lady or gentleman,
so that I could safely place my paw in the whitest hand, or rest my
head against the gayest dress, without fear of a repulse.

The person I loved best in the world was my master; or rather, I should
say, he was the person for whom I had the highest respect. My love was
bestowed in at least an equal degree upon my young mistress, his
daughter Lily, in whose every action I took a deep interest.

She was a graceful, gentle little creature, whom I could have knocked
down and trampled upon in a minute; but though my strength was so
superior to hers, there was no one whom I was so ready to obey. A word
or look from Lily managed me completely; and her gentle warning of "Oh,
Captain," has often recalled me to good manners when I was on the point
of breaking out into fury against some obnoxious person. Willing subject
as I was, I yet looked upon myself in some manner as her guardian and
protector, and it would have fared ill with man or beast who had
attempted to molest her.

As I mentioned before, I was not allowed to come much into the
drawing-room; but Lily found many opportunities of noticing me. I always
sat at the foot of the stairs to watch for her as she came down to the
breakfast-room, when she used to pat my head and say, "How do you do,
good Captain? Nice dog," as she passed. Then I wagged my tail, and was
very happy. I think I should have moped half the day if I had missed
Lily's morning greeting. After breakfast she came into the garden, and
brought me pieces of toast, and gave me lessons in what she considered
clever ways of eating. I should have preferred snapping at her gifts and
bolting them down my own throat in my own way; but, to please Lily, I
learned to sit patiently watching the most tempting buttered crust on
the ground under my nose, when she said, "Trust, Captain!" never
dreaming of touching it till she gave the word of command, "Now it is
paid for;" when I ate it in a genteel and deliberate manner. Having
achieved such a conquest over myself, I thought my education was
complete; but Lily had further refinements in store. She made me hold
the piece of toast on my very nose while she counted _ten_, and at the
word _ten_ I was to toss it up in the air, and catch it in my mouth as
it came down. I was a good while learning this trick, for I did not at
all see the use of it. I could smell the bread distinctly as it lay on
my nose, and why I should not eat it at once I never could understand. I
have often peeped in at the dining-room window to see if my master and
mistress ate their food in the same manner; but though I have sometimes
seen them perform my first feat of sitting quietly before their plates,
I never once saw them put their meat on their noses and catch it.
However, it was Lily's pleasure, and that was enough for me.

She also taught me to shut the door at her command. This was rather a
noisy performance, as I could only succeed by running against the door
with my whole weight; but it gave Lily so much satisfaction, that she
used to open the door a dozen times a day, on purpose for me to bang it.

Another favourite amusement of hers was making me look at myself in the
glass. I grew used to this before long; but the first time that she set
a mirror before me on the ground, I confess that I was a good deal
astonished and puzzled. At the first glance, I took the dog in the glass
for an enemy and rival, intruding upon my dominions, so I naturally
prepared for a furious attack upon him. He appeared equally ready, and I
perceived that he was quite my match. But when, after a great deal of
barking and violence, nobody was hurt, I fancied that the looking-glass
was the barrier which prevented our coming to close quarters, and that
my adversary had entrenched himself behind it in the most cowardly
manner. Determined that he should not profit by his baseness, I
cleverly walked round behind the glass, intending to seize him and give
him a thorough shaking; but there I found nothing! I dashed to the front
once more; there he stood as fierce as ever. Again behind his
battlements--nobody! till after repeated trials, I began to have a
glimmering of the state of the case; and feeling rather ashamed of
having been so taken in, I declined further contest, and lay down
quietly before the mirror to contemplate my own image, and reflect upon
my own reflection.

Lily took great pains with me; but after all, hers were but minor
accomplishments, and I was not allowed to devote my whole attention to
mere tricks or amusements. I was not born to be a lap-dog, and it was
necessary that I should be educated for the more important business of
life. Under my master's careful training, my natural talents were
developed, and my defects subdued, till I was pronounced by the best
judges to be the cleverest setter in the country. My master himself was
a capital sportsman, and I was as proud of him as he was of me. When I
had become sufficiently perfect to be his companion, we used to range
together untired "over hill, over dale, through bush, through brier," he
doing his part and I mine, and bringing home between us such quantities
of game as no one else could boast. This was my real business, but it
was no less my pleasure. I entered into it thoroughly. To point at a
bird immovably till my master's never-failing shot gave the signal for
my running to fetch the foolish thing and lay it at his feet, was to my
mind the greatest enjoyment and the first object in life. And if anybody
should be inclined to despise me on that account, I would beg them to
recollect that it was the work given me to do, and I did it well. Can
everybody say as much? The causes or the consequences of it, I was not
capable of understanding. As to how the birds liked it, that never
entered my head. I thought birds were meant to be shot, and I never
supposed there was any other use in them.

The only thing that distressed me in our shooting excursions was, that
my master would sometimes allow very indifferent sportsmen to accompany
us. I whined, grumbled, and remonstrated with him to the best of my
power when I heard him give an invitation to some awkward booby who
scarcely knew how to hold his gun, but it was all in vain; my master's
only fault was his not consulting my judgment sufficiently in the choice
of his acquaintances, and many a bad day's sport we had in consequence.

Once my patience was tired beyond what any clever dog could be expected
to bear. A young gentleman had arrived at our house whom my master and
mistress treated much better than I thought he deserved. At the first
glance I penetrated into his state of mind, and should have liked to
hear my master growl, and my mistress bark at him; instead of which they
said they were glad to see him, and hoped he had had a pleasant journey.

He immediately began a long string of complaints, blaming everything he
mentioned. He was cold; there never was such weather for the time of
year; he was tired; the roads were bad, the country dull, he had been
obliged to come the last twenty miles cramped up inside a coach. Such a
shame that the railroad did not go the whole way! He was very glad to
get to his journey's end, but it seemed to be more for the sake of his
own comfort than for the pleasure of seeing his friends. His troubles
had not hurt his appetite, as I plainly perceived, for I peeped into the
room several times during dinner to watch him, and listen to his
conversation. It was all in the same style, some fault to be found with
everything. Even Lily could not put him in good humour, though she
seemed to be trying to talk about everything likely to please him. After
the failure of various attempts to find a fortunate topic, she asked if
he had had much shooting this season.

"Plenty of it," he answered; "only so bad. My brother's dogs are
wretched. There is no doing any thing with such brutes."

Lily coloured a little, and said that she thought Rodolph's dogs
beautiful, and that it was very unlike him to have any thing wretched
belonging to him.

"Oh," replied the other, "he is the greenest fellow in the world. He is
always satisfied. I assure you his dogs are good for nothing. I did not
bring down a single bird any time I went out with them."

"Well," said my master, "I hope we shall be able to make amends for that
misfortune. To-morrow you shall go out with the best dog in the
country."

I whined, for I knew he meant me; and I did not like the idea of a
sportsman who began by finding fault with his dogs. I suspected that the
_dogs_ were not to blame. But nobody listened to me.

Next day, while Lily and I were playing in the garden, my master
appeared at the usual time in his shooting-jacket.

"Where is Craven?" he inquired of Lily; "I told him to be ready."

"He is dressing again," answered she, laughing; "his boots had done
something wrong, or his waistcoat was naughty; I forget which."

"Pshaw!" exclaimed my master; "he will waste half the day with his
nonsense. I cannot wait for him. Tell him I am gone on, and he must
follow with John. Go back, Captain," continued he, for I was bounding
after him in hopes of escaping my threatened companion; "go back. You
must do your best this morning, for I suspect you will know more about
the matter than your commander."

Most reluctantly I obeyed, and stayed behind, looking wistfully after
him as he strode away. I consoled myself with Lily's praises, which I
almost preferred to the biscuits she bestowed upon me in equal
profusion. After various compliments, she took a graver tone. "Now,
Captain," she said, "listen to me."

I sat upright, and looked her full in the face.

"You know you are the best of dogs."

I wagged my tail, for I certainly did know it. She told me so every day,
and I believed every thing she said.

"Here is another biscuit for you: catch!"

I caught, and swallowed it at one gulp.

"Good boy. Now that is enough; and I have something to say to you. You
are going out shooting with Craven. He is not his brother, but that
cannot be helped. I hope he will be good-natured to you, but I am not
sure. Now mind that _you_ behave well, and set him a good example. Do
your own work as well as you can, and don't growl and grumble at other
people. And if you are angry, you must not bark, nor bite him, but take
it patiently."

What more she might have added I do not know, for her harangue was
interrupted by old John the groom, who was, like myself, waiting for the
gentleman in question. John's wife had been Lily's nurse, and he himself
taught her to ride and helped her to garden, and had a sort of
partnership with me in taking care of her; so that there was a great
friendship between us all three. He had been listening to our
conversation, and now observed, while he pointed towards the house with
a knowing jerk of his head, "There are those coming, Miss Lily, who need
your advice as much as the poor animal; and I guess it wouldn't be of
much more use."

The last words he said to himself, in an undertone, while Lily went
forward to meet Craven, who now appeared in full costume. He was so hung
about with extra shooting-pouches, belts, powder-flasks, and other
things dangling from him in all directions, that I wondered he could
move at all. Old John shook his head as he looked at him, and muttered,
"Great cry and little wool."

Lily began to explain her father's absence; but Craven did not listen
to what she said, he seemed intent upon making her admire his numerous
contrivances. Lily said he had plenty of tools, and that he would be
very clever if he did work to match, but that in her opinion such
variety was rather puzzling.

"Of course, girls know nothing of field-sports," he answered; "I can't
expect you to understand the merits of these things."

"Oh, no, to be sure," answered Lily, good-humouredly; "I dare say they
are all very clever; only papa sometimes tells _me_ that one wants but
few tools if one knows one's work; but perhaps he only means girls'
work. Very likely you are right about yours."

Old John now came forward very respectfully, but with a particular
twinkle in his eye which I understood. Said he, "As you are encumbered
with so many traps, master, maybe I had best take your gun. You can't
carry every thing useful and not useful."

Craven handed him the gun without any objection, and we set off. From
the moment that I saw him relinquish his gun, his real weapon, for the
sake of all those unnecessary adjuncts, I gave up any lingering hope of
him, and followed in very low spirits. Once in the fields, the prospect
of rejoining my master a little revived me; but even in this I was
disappointed: he had gone over the open country, while Craven preferred
remaining in the plantations. Still, old John's company was a comfort to
me, and when the first bird was descried, I made a capital set at it.
Craven took back his gun; but while he was looking in the wrong pocket
for the right shot, John brought down the partridge.

"A fine bird," said Craven. "If it had not been for this awkward button,
I should have had him."

"You'll soon have another opportunity," said John; "suppose you get
loaded first."

Craven loaded; but something else was wrong about his contrivances, and
before he was ready, John had bagged the pheasant. At last Craven got a
shot, and missed it. He said it was John's fault for standing in the way
of his seeing me.

"Well, I shan't be in the way any longer," said John; "for I was to go
back to my work if I was not wanted, after having shown you the
plantations. So good morning, master, and good luck next time."

The next time, and the next, and the next, no better success. Bird after
bird rose, and flew away before our noses, as if in sheer ridicule of
such idle popping, till I felt myself degraded in the eyes of the very
partridges. Half the morning we passed in this way, wasting time and
temper, powder and shot; and the birds, as I well knew, despising us for
missing them, till my patience was quite exhausted, and I longed to go
home. Still, I remembered Lily's parting injunctions, and resolved to be
game to the last myself, even if we were to have no other game that day.
I also reflected that no one was born with a gun in his hand, and that
Craven might not have had opportunity of acquiring dexterity; that there
was a beginning to everything, and that it was the business of the more
experienced to help the ignorant. So I continued to be as useful to him
as I possibly could.

Suddenly, after a particularly provoking miss, Craven exclaimed: "It is
all your fault, you stupid dog; you never turn the bird out where one
expects it. If you knew your business, I could have bagged dozens."

Highly affronted, I now felt that I had borne enough, and that it was
hopeless to attempt being of use to a creature as unjust and ungrateful
as he was ignorant and conceited. I, therefore, turned round, and in a
quiet but dignified and decided manner took my way towards home. Craven
called, whistled, shouted, but I took no notice. I was too much
disgusted to have anything more to do with him; and I never turned my
head nor slackened my pace till I arrived at my own kennel, when I
curled myself round in my straw, and brooded over my wrongs till I went
to sleep.

I kept rather out of sight during the rest of the day, for more reasons
than one. An inferior creature cannot at once rise superior to an
affront, and clear it off his mind like a man; we are slaves to our
impressions, and till they are forgotten we cannot help acting upon
them; and I am afraid I rather took pleasure in nursing my wrath. Then I
did not wish to see Craven; and perhaps I might feel a little ashamed of
myself, and not quite sure what my master and mistress might think of my
running away. But I happened to hear John chuckling over the affair, and
saying that my master had been very much amused with the story; so I
regained confidence enough next morning to present myself once more,
though in rather a shy way, to Lily at the foot of the stairs.

"Oh, come in to breakfast, you capital dog," exclaimed she; so I
followed her, delighted to find that I was in the same favour as ever.
But, alas! how little did I foresee the misfortune that was coming upon
me! I had better have stayed in my kennel and fancied the whole world
affronted with me for a few days longer.

Craven and I met on the rug, _my_ rug, as I considered it; for it was
one of my principal pleasures to sit on that rug with my feet on the
fender, warming my nose. I sometimes toasted myself all over, till my
coat was so hot that Lily squeaked when she touched me. She would have
barked, I suppose, if she had known how. Now Craven stood in my place,
with one of his hind paws on my fender. He looked scornfully at me, and
I returned his glance with one of equal contempt, though I longed to
snap at his shining heel, and teach him sense and manners.

But Lily, who never was angry with any body, did not perceive how much
we disliked each other, and exclaimed in her innocent way, "Craven, here
is Captain come to make friends with you, and to beg pardon for
deserting you yesterday. Shake a paw, Captain."

Shaking a paw with Craven was a thing I would not do; and my master, a
good sportsman himself, entered into my feelings.

"The dog was thoroughly provoked by your bad shooting, Craven," said he,
"and you will never make either him or me believe it was his fault. But
try again. There is no necessity for you to be a sportsman; but if you
choose to do a thing at all, you had better do it properly; and you may
learn as well as any body else, if you will not fancy yourself perfect.
We will all go out together to-day."

And so we all went out together on that fatal day. I did myself credit,
and my master did me justice, and I was happy in my ignorance of coming
events. Craven shot and missed, and shot and missed again; but my
master's laugh stopped him whenever he was beginning to lay the blame on
dog or gun.

"Bad workmen always find fault with their tools, Craven," said my
master. "Take better aim."

John tried to teach him, but he would listen to no advice.

It is seldom that a person's fault or folly injures himself alone, and,
alas for me! I was the victim of Craven's conceit and obstinacy. At his
next fire I felt a pang that I never can forget. His ill-directed shot
had entered my shoulder, and I sank down howling with agony. My
companions instantly surrounded me, uttering exclamations of alarm,
regret, and pity, Craven himself being the foremost and loudest. He
never should forgive himself, he said; it was all his awkwardness and
stupidity; he was never so sorry for any thing in his life.

He ran to a neighbouring cottage for a shutter, while my master and John
bound up the wound. They then placed me carefully on the shutter, and
carried me home, Craven reproaching himself and pitying me every time he
opened his lips. I scarcely knew him for the same person who had been
so conceited and supercilious half an hour before; and even my master,
who was extremely angry with him, grew softened by his penitence.

They carried me two at a time, in turn; and when Craven was walking by
my side, he stroked my head, saying, "Poor Captain, how I wish I could
do any thing to relieve you! if you could but understand how grieved and
ashamed I am, I think you would forgive me."

Though suffering greatly, I could not but be touched by his sorrow; and
when I heard the kind tones of his voice, and saw tears standing in his
eyes, my anger quite melted away, and I licked his hand to show that I
bore no malice.

My accident confined me to the kennel for a considerable time, but every
care and attention was paid me. My master and John doctored my wound,
and Lily brought me my food every day with her own hands. As long as
Craven remained in the house, he never failed to accompany her,
repeating his regret and good-will towards me; and after he had left us
I heard old John observe: "I always thought there was some good in
Master Craven; and his brother is as fine a fellow as ever lived, and
won't let it drop. The boy is quite changed now. Between Captain and
Miss Lily, I reckon he has had a lesson he'll not forget."

In due time I recovered, and was as strong and handsome as ever; but,
strange to say, I no longer felt like the same dog. My own sufferings
had suggested some serious reflections as to whether being shot might
not be as unpleasant to the birds as to me; and I really began quite to
pity them. So far the change was for the better; but it did not stop
there: not only was my love for field-sports extinguished, but it had
given place to a timidity which neither threats nor caresses could
overcome. I shuddered at the very sight of a gun, and no amount either
of reward or punishment could induce me again to brave its effects.
Under all other circumstances I was as courageous as before: I would
have attacked a wild beast, or defended the house against a robber,
without the slightest fear; but I could not stand fire; and the moment I
saw a gun pointed, there was no help for it, I fairly turned tail and
ran off.

"The poor beast is spoilt, sir," said John to my master. "It is cruel to
force him, and he'll never be good for any thing again."

"It is of no use taking him out," replied my master; "but he is far from
good for nothing. He has plenty of spirit still, and we must make a
house-dog of him."

So I was appointed house-dog. At first I certainly felt the change of
life very unpleasant; but I reflected that it was my own doing, though
not exactly my own fault; and I determined to make the best of it, and
adapt myself to my new employments. At the beginning of that summer, if
any body had told me that I should be content to stay in the court and
garden, sometimes even tethered to a tree on the lawn,--that my most
adventurous amusement would he a quiet walk over the grounds, and my
most exciting occupation the looking-out for suspicious characters,--I
should have sneered, perhaps even growled at the prediction; but so it
was, and before long I grew reconciled to my new station, and resolved
to gain more credit as a guard than even as a sporting dog.

We were not much troubled with thieves, for we lived in a quiet country
place, where we knew every body and every body knew us, and no one was
likely to wish us any harm; but it did once happen that my vigilance was
put to the proof.

There was a fair in our neighbourhood, attended by all the villages
near. During the morning I amused myself by watching the people in
their smart dresses passing our gate, laughing and talking merrily. I
had many acquaintances among them, who greeted me with good-natured
speeches, which I answered by polite wags of my tail.

John, and others of our servants, went to the fair, and seemed to enjoy
themselves as much as any body. They returned home before dark, and all
the respectable persons who had passed our gate in the morning re-passed
it at an early hour in the evening, looking as if they had spent a
pleasant day, but perfectly quiet and sober; and I was much pleased at
seeing them so well behaved.

But among the crowd of passengers in the morning, I had noticed several
men whose appearance I highly disapproved. Some of them scowled at me as
they passed, and I felt sure they were bent upon no good; but one, the
worst-looking of all, stopped, and whistled to me, holding out a piece
of meat. I need scarcely say that I indignantly rejected his bribe--for
such I knew it was--meant to entice me in some way or other to neglect
my duty; so I growled and snarled, and watched him well as he passed on.
No fear of my not knowing him again by sight or smell. Several of these
ill-looking men returned intoxicated, to my great disgust; for I had a
peculiar objection to persons in that condition, and never trusted a
man who could degrade himself below my own level. I watched them all,
every moment expecting the one who had tried to curry favour with me,
for I had an instinctive assurance that I had not seen the last of him.
Night drew on while I was still on the look-out, and yet he did not
appear. The rest of the family went calmly to bed, taking no notice of
my disquietude; but nothing could have induced _me_ to curl myself round
and shut my eyes. I was sure danger was near, and it was my part as a
faithful guardian to be prepared for it. So I alternately paced
cautiously round the court, or sat up in my kennel with my head out
listening for every sound. By degrees the returning parties of revellers
dwindled to now and then a solitary pedestrian; and the hum of voices
gradually subsided, till all was silent, and the whole country seemed
asleep. Still I watched on, with unabated vigilance, deep into the
night. At last I thought I heard outside the wall a very cautious
footstep, accompanied by an almost inaudible whisper. I pricked up my
ears; the footstep came nearer, and a hand was upon the lock of the
courtyard-gate. I sniffed the air; there was no mistake; I smelt the
very man whom I expected. Others might be with him, but there was _he_.
Without a moment's delay, I set up an alarum that might have wakened the
whole village; at any rate, it woke our whole house. Down stairs came my
master in his dressing-gown; down came old John, lantern in hand, and
red nightcap on head. Lily peeped out of her bedroom window, with a
shawl over her shoulders; and seeing her papa in the court, ran down to
help him,--as if she could have been any help against robbers, poor
little darling! The servants assembled in such strange attire, that they
looked to me like a herd of animals who had got into each other's coats
by mistake. But the maids had kept their own voices at any rate, for
they screamed almost as loud as I barked. It was a proud moment for me;
and the greater everybody's fright, and the more noise and confusion
they made, the prouder I was. It was all _my_ doing. It was _I_ who had
called them all in the middle of the night. Their confidence in me was
such, that at the sound of my voice they had all left their beds, and
assembled in the courtyard in their night-gowns. How clever and careful
they must think me! And how clever and careful I thought myself! I
danced round Lily, and bounded about in all directions, till I knocked
down the sleepy stable-boy, and got into every body's way. I never was
in such glee in my life. But my master and John were quiet enough, and
they examined the gate, and the footsteps outside, and decided that
there certainly had been an attempt to break into the house, but that
the robbers had been frightened away by me.

"It has been a narrow escape for them, sir," said John; "for if they had
succeeded in getting in, the dog would have pinned them."

"Captain has done his duty well," said my master, "and no one can call
him useless any more."

"It is a good thing no one was hurt," added Lily; "but I am glad they
were frightened. Perhaps the fright will cure them."

After this adventure I was treated with great respect. By night I
watched the house, and by day I was Lily's constant companion. We were
allowed to take long rambles together, as her father knew she was safe
under my care. I learnt to carry her basket or parasol for her, and to
sit faithfully guarding them while she scrambled up banks or through
bushes, looking for flowers. I was also an excellent swimmer, and could
fetch sticks which she had thrown to the very middle of the stream. I
could not make out why she wanted the sticks, as she never took them
home with her; but we were quite of one mind about fetching them out of
the water. Often I accompanied her to the village, and lay at the
cottage-doors while she paid visits to the people inside. Then the
little children used to gather round me, and pat me, and pull my ears;
and even if they pulled a little too hard, I scorned to complain, or
hurt them in return; and when Lily came out, I was rewarded by her
praise of me as the best and gentlest dog in the world.

At other times she used to establish herself to read or work under a
tree on the lawn, while I lay at her feet, or sat upright by her side. I
was careful not to interrupt her when she was busy, but she often left
off reading to speak to me, and sometimes let me keep my front paw in
hers as we sat together. These were happy days, and I should have liked
them to last for ever. But this state of tranquillity was to be
disturbed, and I am sorry to say by my own folly.

I had insensibly imbibed a notion, or rather a feeling, that I was
Lily's only pet and favourite, and that nothing else had a right to
attract her notice. Of course I allowed her to pay proper attention to
human beings; I knew that I could not come into competition with _them_,
and therefore I never was jealous of them; but a word or a look
bestowed upon an inferior animal appeared to me an affront which proper
self-respect required me to resent.

One day Lily appeared in the garden carrying a little white kitten in
her arms. I should have liked to have it to worry, and as Lily was very
good-natured, I thought she had brought it for that purpose; so I sat
watching ready to snap at it the moment she should toss it at me. After
a time, I began to think she ought not to tantalise me by keeping me
waiting so long, and I tried to show my impatience by various signs that
she could understand. But to my surprise she was not only insensible to
my hints, but took upon herself to reprove me, saying, "No, Captain,
that is not being a good dog; you must not want to hurt the poor little
kitten. Go farther off."

If ever I was affronted in my life it was then. I turned round, and
shaking my ears, sat down with my back to Lily and her disgusting
kitten, and absolutely refused even to look round when she spoke to me.

This was the beginning of a period in my life to which I always recur
with shame and regret. I continued in a state of unmitigated sulks. Even
Lily could not appease me. If she came to see me by herself, indeed, or
with only human beings in her train, I brightened up for the moment;
but if she appeared with the kitten in her arms, my surliness was
disgraceful. Nobody knows how I detested the kitten. I thought it a
misfortune to the universe that that kitten should exist.

On thinking it over at this distance of time, I honestly confess that I
had no right to be jealous; Lily remitted none of her kindness, and gave
me every proof of much higher regard and esteem than she bestowed on the
kitten. She fed me, patted me, took me out walking, and talked to me
just as usual; and as soon as she perceived my objection to her new pet,
she left off bringing it with her, and was careful to keep it out of my
sight. But I saw it in spite of all her pains. It was incessantly
intruding itself upon my notice, sometimes on the roof of the house,
sometimes jumping from a window-ledge; now perched upon a paling, now
climbing the pillars of the verandah; and always looking clean and white
and pretty, with a bit of blue ribbon which Lily had tied round its
neck, as if on purpose to provoke me. Even when I did not see it, I
heard it mew; and when I did not hear it, I thought about it.

I was miserable. To be sure I had no right to expect Lily to like nobody
but me, and I had nothing to complain of; every pleasure and comfort in
life was mine. Indeed, I think a real grievance would have been rather
pleasant to me. I should have liked an injustice. I was determined to
sulk, and should have been glad to have something to sulk at. But no;
people would persevere in being kind to me. I might be as ill-tempered
as I pleased; nobody punished, or even scolded me; and whenever I chose
to be in good humour, my friends were always ready to meet me half-way.
Indeed, I never was quite sure whether they noticed my ill-temper or
not. But I did not try to come round, though certainly sulking did not
conduce to my comfort. I once heard my master remark, in reference to
some disagreeable human being, that ill-tempered people made themselves
more unhappy than they made others; so I suppose sulking does not always
agree even with men; I know it does not with dogs. It was a wretched
time.

I continued to brood over my imaginary grievances, little thinking how
soon they would be exchanged for real troubles. I had been discontented
while every enjoyment was at my command, and now I was to wish in vain
for the happiness I had neglected. And yet, in the point which I
considered most important, I had my own way. I one day thought that if
I were never again to see Lily caressing that kitten, I should be quite
happy. I never again saw Lily caressing the kitten, and from that day my
real sorrows began.

There was a bustle in the house. Every thing seemed in confusion. Every
body was doing something different from usual. Furniture and trunks were
carried up and down stairs. My master's study was full of great chests;
and he and Lily, instead of reading the books, spent all their time in
hiding them in these chests. Next, my friend John came and nailed covers
on the chests. After the first was nailed down, I jumped upon it, and
sat watching John while he hammered the others; switching my tail, and
winking my eyes at every stroke of his hammer, rather surprised at all
that went on, but yet liking the bustle.

"Ah, poor old boy," said John, "I wonder how you'll take it."

"Take what?" thought I, and wondered too.

One day, John and another man went out with the horses, each riding on
one and leading another. Thinking they were going to exercise them, I
followed as I often did; but when we came to the end of the village John
ordered me home, saying, "Good bye, Captain. Don't forget us, old
fellow." I returned according to his command, but felt very much
puzzled, as John had never before sent me home.

On arriving at the house, a waggon was standing at the door, piled up to
a great height with chests and packages; and on the top of all was
perched an ugly cur, barking as if he considered himself the master of
everything. I was willing to make a civil acquaintance with him, but the
little mongrel had the audacity to bark at _me_,--me in my own
dominions! I did not think he was worth touching, besides which, I could
not get at him; but I growled fiercely; and his master, who was loading
the waggon, desired me to "get out of the way."

Thus rejected on all sides, I betook myself to the court, and rolled
myself round in the straw of my own kennel, where nobody could affront
me. There I remained till I heard Lily's sweet voice at a distance
calling, "Captain, Captain!" I bounded forth once more at the sound, and
met my pretty mistress in her walking dress, with the basket in her hand
which I had so often carried. But she did not invite me to accompany
her. "Poor Captain," said she, "I am come to bid you good bye. I am
afraid you will miss us sadly; but I hope they will take good care of
you. Good bye, best of dogs."

"Come, Lily, make haste," I heard my master call from the gate, and Lily
and I ran towards him. He was standing by a carriage, with the door
open and the steps let down. The gardener and his wife were near; he
with his hat in his hand, and she wiping her eyes with the corner of her
apron. Lily jumped into the carriage, her papa followed her; the
gardener wished them a pleasant journey, "and a happy return," added his
wife, and they drove off, Lily keeping her head at the window, and
kissing her hand to us till she was out of sight.

At first I had no idea that they were not coming back. Though I heard
the gardener say that they were "gone for good," it did not occur to me
that that meant harm to us. They often went out for a day and returned
in the evening; so at the usual time I expected their ring at the bell,
and went to the gate to meet them. But no bell rang; no carriage drove
up; no sound of horses' hoofs was to be heard in the distance, though I
listened till the gardener came to lock up for the night, and ordered me
to the court, where it was my business to keep guard.

Next morning there was a strange stillness and idleness. No master
taking his early walk over the grounds. No Lily gathering her flowers
before breakfast. No John to open the stable door, and let me in to bark
good morning to the horses. No horses; a boy sweeping the deserted
stable, and rack and manger empty. No carriage; the coach-house filled
with lumber, and the shutters closed in the loft. No servants about. I
rather congratulated myself upon the disappearance of Lily's maid, who
had a habit of making uncivil speeches if I crossed her path in running
to meet Lily. That maid and I had never been friends since I once had
the misfortune to shake myself near her when coming out of the water. I
confess I did wet her, and I did dirty her; but I did not know that
water would hurt her coat,--it never hurt mine; and she need not have
borne malice for ever; I should have forgiven her long ago if she had
dirtied me. But whenever she saw me she took the opportunity of saying
something mortifying, as, "Out of the way; don't come nigh me with that
great mop of yours!" or, "Get along with you! I wonder what Miss Lily
can see to like in such a great lumbering brute." I kept out of her way
as much as I could, and it was now some consolation that she did not
come in mine.

But it was a dull day. In due time the gardener's wife called, and gave
me my breakfast, setting it down outside the kitchen door. It was a
comfortable breakfast, for she was a good-natured woman, not likely to
neglect Lily's charge to take care of me. I wagged my tail, and looked
up in her face to thank her, but she was already gone without taking
farther notice of me. She had done her work of giving me the necessaries
of life, and my feelings were nothing to her. How I remembered my pretty
Lily, and wished for her pleasant welcome.

After breakfast I went on an expedition to the flower-garden, thinking I
might have a chance of finding some trace of my mistress in that
favourite haunt. The gate was shut, but I heard steps, and scratched to
be let in. I scratched and whined for some time; Lily would not have
kept me half so long. At last the gardener looked over the top of the
gate:

"Oh, it's you," said he; "I thought so. But you had best go and amuse
yourself in places proper for you; you are not coming to walk over my
flowerbeds any more."

He did not speak unkindly, and I had often heard him tell Lily that I
was "best out of the flower-garden;" so I could not reasonably grumble;
but his speech showed the change in my position, and I walked away from
the closed gate with my mind much oppressed, and my tail between my
legs.

I intended to go and meditate in the boat, but here again I was
disappointed; the boat-house was locked; I had no resource but to jump
into the water and swim to a little island in which Lily had a favourite
arbour. There in a summer's day she often rested, hidden in jessamine
and honeysuckle; and there I now took refuge, attracted to the spot by
its strong association with herself.

I scarcely know whether I sought the arbour with the hope of finding her
present, or the intention of mourning her absent; but I went to think
about her. Alas! that was all I could do. She was not there. A book of
hers had been left unheeded on the ground, and I laid down and placed my
paws upon it to guard it, as I had often done before. In this position I
fell asleep, and remained unconscious of fortunes or misfortunes, till I
was awakened by dreaming of dinner. _That_ dream could be realised. I
jumped up, shook myself, and yawned more comfortably than I had done all
day.

On moving my paws from Lily's book, it struck me that it would be right
to carry it home to her; and then once more the hope revived of finding
her at home herself. It was the most likely thing in the world that she
should come home to dinner. Everybody did, I supposed; I was going home
to dinner myself.

With the book in my mouth, I swam across the water. Perhaps I did not
keep it quite dry, but I carried it into the house, and laid it down
before the gardener and his wife, who were the only persons I could see
on the premises.

"Well, that is sensible, I must confess," said the gardener. "The dumb
animal has found missy's book, and brought it back. Miss Lily would
like to hear that."

"Ah, she always thought a deal of the creature," replied his wife; "and
for her sake he shan't be neglected. Here's your dinner, Captain."

"Give him that bone," said the gardener; "that's what he'll like."

So they gave me a charming bone, quite to my taste; and for a time I
forgot all my anxieties in the pleasure of turning it round, sucking,
biting, pawing, and growling over it. I cared for no other dinner;
indeed I never could understand how people could trouble themselves to
eat anything else as long as there was a bone to gnaw. But it is
fortunate there are various tastes in the world; and the strange
preference of men for other food is convenient for us dogs, as it leaves
us in more undisputed possession of the bones than if our masters liked
gnawing them too.

But the pleasure of a bone does not last for ever, and among the nobler
races of animals Thought cannot be entirely kept under by eating. I have
heard that greedy human beings sometimes reduce themselves to the
condition of pigs, who are entirely devoted to cramming; but _I_ should
not choose to degrade myself to that level. So I soon began meditating,
and cogitating, and speculating again.

My life now grew every day more and more dismal. Dinner-time brought its
bone, but bones soon failed to comfort me. The gardener said I was "off
my feed," and his wife feared I should mope to death. All day I wandered
about looking for Lily, and at night retired to my kennel, under the sad
impression that she was farther off than ever. The gardener himself once
invited me into the flower-garden in hopes of amusing me, and I explored
all the gravel-walks, carefully avoiding the borders; but there was no
trace of my lost Lily, and I never cared to visit it again.

One day I thought I would search the house. It was thrown open to me.
There were no forbidden drawing-rooms now; I prowled about as I pleased.
If the doors were shut, I might scratch as long as I liked; nobody
answered. If open, I walked round and round the room, brushing the
wainscot with my tail. There were no china ornaments to be thrown down
now, and I might whisk it about as I would. Formerly I had often wished
for free entrance to those rooms; now I should have welcomed a friendly
hand that shut me out of them. In passing before a large mirror, I
marvelled at my own forlorn and neglected appearance. Once, I was worth
looking at in a glass; now, what a difference! Sorrow had so changed my
whole aspect, that I stared with dismay at the gaunt spectre which
stared at me in return, and we howled at each other for company.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN'S DREAM. Page 40]

Lying down before the blank mirror, which had formerly thrown back so
many pleasant images, and now reflected only my solitary figure in the
deserted room, I silently pondered on the past. In a half-wakeful,
half-dozing state, my eyes alternately opening and shutting, now winking
and blinking at the glass, now for a moment losing sight of every thing,
the events of my life seemed to pass before me in a dream; the persons
with whom I had been connected rose up again as shadows, and I myself
seemed another shadow gliding about among them, but a shadow whose
behaviour I had acquired a new faculty of observing.

I saw myself now as others saw me,--an uncommon condition either for
dogs or men,--and I watched my own deportment in all my states of mind
and stages of life. I saw myself first a mere puppy, not worth notice.
The puppy grew, and I saw it as a dog; a fine, well-bred, and certainly
a fortunate dog. Then as a clever, knowing, useful dog; a gentle,
patient, obedient dog. Sometimes perhaps an awkward or foolish dog; but
those were pardonable faults, while I was certainly a brave, honest, and
faithful dog. But at last I saw myself as a _jealous dog_; and I paused,
startled at the strange light in which my conduct appeared. How silly,
unreasonable, and fractious I had been! I plainly perceived that what I
had taken for injured dignity and wounded affection was nothing but
pride and envy; that I had not a single ground of complaint, but that my
own ill-temper might have justly given offence to my best friends; and
while I had fancied myself setting so high a value upon Lily's regard, I
was recklessly running the risk of losing it altogether. Happily I had
been spared _that_ punishment, however well deserved. Lily's friendship
had never failed me. She had either excused or not perceived my faults,
and we had parted on the best possible terms.

Now that I could view matters more justly, I was quite out of patience
with myself for fancying that I should be happy if I no longer saw Lily
nursing that kitten. Happy indeed! There was no chance of my being
troubled with such a sight, and I was miserable! I would have put up
with all the cats and kittens that were met coming from St. Ives; I
would have tried to settle the quarrel between the Kilkenny cats who ate
each other up, all but the tips of their tails;--any thing to see Lily
once more, even if she chose to nurse all the kittens of "Catland."

But it was too late; my regrets were all in vain; and the only course
that seemed left for me now was to give up the rest of my days to
brooding over my sorrows and my faults. But before I had quite devoted
myself to this line of life, I gave a glance at my shadow in the glass
doing the same. There I saw him moping away all his time; making no
amends for his bad conduct, no attempts at behaving better; utterly
useless, sulky, and disagreeable; in fact, more foolish than ever.

"No," thought I, as I jumped up and shook myself all over, "I will not
have this distressing experience for nothing; I will make good use of
it; I cannot recall the past, but I will act differently for the
future;" and down I lay again to make plans for the future. Coming
events cast no shadows before, either in the glass or in my dreams. I
knew nothing about what I might, could, would, or should do. The Past I
had lost, the Future was not in my power; and what remained to me?
Perhaps I might never have an opportunity of behaving well again.

I was fast relapsing into despondency, when suddenly I was aroused from
my dreams by a sound once odious to me. I raised myself upon my front
paws and listened. There was no mistake, I heard it again; a thin and
timid _mew_, dying away in the distance, and sounding as if it proceeded
from the mere shadow of a cat. But faint and shadowy as it was, I
recognised it; it recalled me to realities, and the conviction of my
right line of conduct flashed across my mind. The Present--the present
moment was mine. I could only take warning by the past, and hope for the
future, but I must act _now_. I have but to take every opportunity when
it offers itself, and there would be no fear of not having opportunities
enough. Here was one ready at hand. Instead of worrying that kitten, who
was now in my power, I would magnanimously endure her existence. I would
do more; I would let her know that she had nothing any longer to fear
from me; and in pursuance of this kind intention, I walked about the
room in search of her.

I soon descried her, perched upon the top of a high bookcase, not daring
to come down for fear of me. She was altered by recent events, though
not so much as I. She looked forlorn and uncomfortable, but not shaggy,
haggard, or dirty. The regard to her toilette which had characterised
her in better days still clung to her, and made her neat and tidy in
misfortune. The blue ribbon round her neck was indeed faded, but in
other respects she looked as clean and white and sleek as Lily herself.
She had evidently licked herself all over every day, instead of moping
in the dirt. She and Lily had always been somewhat alike in point of
cleanliness. Indeed, I once imagined that Lily must lick herself all
over in order to look so clean; but on further consideration I had
reason to believe that she commonly attained her object by plunging into
cold water, more after my own fashion.

But to return to the kitten. There she stood, the very picture of fear;
her legs stretched, her tail arched, her back raised, trying to assume
the best posture of defence she could, but evidently believing it of no
use. She mewed louder at every step I took nearer. Even if I had been
inclined to harm her, she was safe enough on the top of that high
bookcase; but she did not know that. In her inexperience, she fancied me
able to spring about the world as she did, and expected every moment
that I should perch on the carved oak crown, and seize her in my mouth,
jump down again and crunch her as she would a mouse.

She began running backwards and forwards on the top of her bookcase,
mewing piteously at every turn. I understood her language: it meant,
"Oh, what shall I do? Mew, mew! Pray, my lord, have pity upon an
unfortunate kitten! Mew, mew, mew! If you will let me run away this
time, I will keep out of your lordship's sight all the rest of my life.
Mew, mew, mew! Oh dear, I had not the least intention of intruding on
your highness; I thought your majesty was in the stable. I wish I was
in the coal-cellar myself. Oh, oh, pray! oh, mew!"

So she went on for a long time, in too great a fright to observe the
encouragement and condescension which I threw into my countenance and
manner. I sat down in front of the bookcase, and holding my head on one
side, looked up at her with an expression of gentle benevolence, which I
thought must re-assure the most timid spirit. It had some effect. She
ceased running from side to side, and stopped opposite me, her yellow
eyes fixed on mine. I returned her gaze, and wagged my tail. She lowered
hers, which bad been held up like a peacock's, and reduced to its
natural dimensions. After a sufficient amount of staring, we began to
understand one another, and Pussy's mews were in a very different tone,
and one much more satisfactory to me.

[Illustration: PUSS AND THE CAPTAIN. Page 46]

Though every animal makes use of a dialect of its own, so different as
to appear to men a distinct language for each race,--for instance, the
barking of a dog, the mewing of a cat, the bellowing of a bull,
&c.,--still, a general mode of expression is common to all, and all can
understand and be understood by one another. The reason of this is, that
the universal language is that of _feeling_ only, which is alike to
every one, and can be made evident by the most inarticulate sounds.
Moans, murmurs, sighs, whines, growls, roars, are sufficient to
express our _feelings_: our _thoughts_, when we have any, we must keep
to ourselves; for they cannot be made intelligible by mere sound without
speech, and speech we know belongs to man alone. In fact, I suppose it
is the power of thinking and speaking which makes him our master;
without it, I am not at all sure that he would have so much the upper
hand of us, for we are often the strongest. But a man can always know
what he means to do, and why he means to do it; and he can tell others,
and consult them about it; which, of course, gives him an immense
advantage over us, who only act upon the spur of the moment, without
knowing whether we are right or wrong.

Good-nature was all that Pussy and I wanted to express just now, and
_that_ is always easy to show, with or without words. Mews in various
tones from her were met by small, good-humoured half-barks and agreeable
grunts from me, till at last she fairly left off mewing, and began to
purr. Much pleased with my success so far, I now lay down, stretching
out my front paws to their full length before, and my tail behind,
brushing the floor in a half-circle with the latter. Then I yawned in a
friendly way, and finally laid my head down on my paws to watch my
little protégée quietly, in hopes of enticing her from her fortress.

This last insinuating attitude decided her. She gently placed first one
little white paw, and then another, on projecting ornaments of the
bookcase, one step on the lion, and the next on the unicorn; and without
hurting either herself or the delicate carved work which she chose to
use as her staircase, she alighted harmless and unharmed within my
reach. Then she mewed once more; but that was her last expression of
doubt or dread. I soon reassured her; and that moment was the first of a
confidence and intimacy seldom seen between our uncongenial races.

We had now, in our way, a long conversation, during which we became
pretty well acquainted with each other's dispositions; and in due time
we descended the stairs together in perfect amity; I gravely walked step
by step, and looking up benignly at the gambols of little Pussy, who,
now in high spirits, had no idea of coming down in a regular way, but
must scramble up the banisters, hang by her claws from the hand-rail,
recover herself instantaneously when within an inch of falling headlong
into the hall, and play a hundred other wild tricks. A short time
before, I should have thought all this a most despicable waste of time
and strength; but now I could see that it did her good and made her
happy, and I looked on rather with approbation.

I shall never forget the surprise of the gardener's wife when Puss and I
entered the kitchen side by side. She screamed as if we had been a
couple of wild beasts.

"Oh," cried she, "there's that poor little kitten just under Captain's
nose! He'll be the death of her. What shall I do?"

She seized a broom, and held it between us, ready to beat me if I
ventured to attack the kitten. But I wagged my tail, and Puss jumped
over the broomstick.

"Well to be sure!" said Mrs. Gardener, letting fall the broom, and
holding up her hands; "did any body ever see the like of that!"

She placed a saucer of milk on the floor, and I sat quietly and let the
kitten drink it. The kitten herself was a little surprised at this, and
hesitated before beginning, not knowing exactly what it might be proper
for her to do; indeed, I could scarcely expect her to understand the
etiquette of so unusual a circumstance; but she had a great deal of
tact, and soon perceived that I wished her to go on naturally; so she
began lapping, though looking round at me between every two or three
mouthfuls, to make sure that she was not taking a liberty. But meeting
with nothing but encouragement, she finished her repast with great
satisfaction, and we both laid ourselves down by the kitchen-fire, as
if we had been friends all our lives.

"Well to be sure!" exclaimed the gardener's wife again. It was her
favourite phrase; she seemed never to tire of it, and to have little
else to say; but I understood what she meant, and took a comfortable nap
in consequence.

By and by came dinner, and a pleasant little meal it was. Instead of
flying at the kitten for presuming to eat at all, I quite enjoyed having
a companion. My platter stood, as usual, in the yard, and Pussy's in a
corner of the kitchen; but by mutual consent we began dragging our
respective bones along the ground to eat in company; and the gardener's
wife seeing the proceeding, carried our plates for us, and placed them
side by side outside the door, and we finished our meal in the most
sociable manner.

Times were now altered: but I need not give a detailed account of every
day. The good understanding between Pussy and me continued to increase,
till it ripened into the warmest friendship. Uncongenial companion as
she appeared, I grew by degrees fonder of her than I had ever been of
any of my own tribe; and although our habits were by nature totally
dissimilar, we learned to understand, and even to take pleasure in
accommodating ourselves to each other's little peculiarities.

I confess this was not done in a moment. At first I certainly was
occasionally annoyed by Pussy's inconsistencies. She would profess to be
so refined, that a speck of dirt on her white coat made her unhappy; so
delicate, that she could not endure to wet her feet; so modest, that she
could not bear to be looked at while she was eating; while at the same
time she would scamper into the dirtiest hole after a mouse, and then
devour the nasty vermin with a satisfaction quite disgusting to a
well-bred sporting dog like myself.

I wished to educate her in the sentiments and habits of my own nobler
race, but I found it a hopeless task. If I took her out for a walk, and
tried to impress her with the pleasure of a good healthy swim in the
pond, she listened politely; but in spite of all my arguments, when we
arrived at the water's edge, and I plunged in, she never could be
induced to follow; there she stood, mewing and shivering on the brink,
not daring even to wet her claws. If I objected to her mice, she argued
that they were her natural food, and agreed with her; and so on through
all my attempts to reform her.

The little creature had generally an answer ready; and what was
peculiarly provoking to a person unused to contradiction, like myself,
she often disputed points upon which I had supposed there could be but
one opinion. When I was trying to shame her into being more like a dog,
she actually told me that she doubted whether mine really was the nobler
race, for that the lion was her chief, and she challenged me to show his
equal. This was the more irritating because I could not answer it; and I
take some credit to myself for having kept my temper on the occasion, as
I did feel tempted to give her a shake. Luckily it occurred to me that
quarrelling with people for being in the right would not put them in the
wrong, and that shaking them might not be the way to shake their
opinions. So I was silent, and pretended to be indulgent.

After all, the little cat had received an education extremely suitable
to her character and circumstances. Lily had made an in-door companion
of her, as she had made an out-door one of me, and had taken great pains
to cultivate her natural talents. Her manners were perfect. It was
impossible to be more gentle, graceful, and courteous than Puss. Always
at hand, but never in the way; quick in observing, but slow in
interfering; active and ready in her own work, but quiet and retiring
when not required to come forward; affectionate in her temper, and
regular in her habits,--she was a thoroughly feminine domestic
character.

She had her own ideas about me, which she communicated to me when we
were sufficiently intimate for her to speak openly. Perhaps she did not
admire me quite so much as I admired myself; but perhaps she was
right--who knows? I have heard that even among men, lookers-on are
sometimes the best judges. She did full justice to my strength and
courage, and applauded my daring way of rushing upon an enemy, without
regard to his size or position, instead of running into a corner and
spitting at him. She admitted, without hesitation, that mine was the
superior proceeding; but she suggested, that perhaps it might be as well
not to be quite so ready to attack other dogs before they had given me
any offence: also that it was unnecessary to suppose that every man who
came to the house _must_ have bad intentions, whether he gave me just
cause for suspicion or not. In fact, she hinted that it was good to be
brave, but bad to be quarrelsome. Then as to my personal appearance, she
acknowledged that I was larger and handsomer than she, and that my
rough, shaggy coat was far from unbecoming; but when I laughed at her
finical cleanliness, and called her affected for not keeping her own
white fur as rough and muddy as mine, she reminded me that it was that
very neatness, so despised by me, which had procured her entrance into
Lily's drawing-room, while I, with all my good qualities, was never
allowed to come up stairs.

I had always thought it rather grand to bang about in a careless manner;
and if I knocked any thing down, I supposed it was the thing's fault. I
once swept down with my tail a whole trayful of crockery; and when I was
scolded for doing mischief, I thought it quite sufficient excuse to say
to myself, "I did not do it on purpose; what is the use of making such a
fuss?" But I now saw clearly that Pussy's care not to do any mischief at
all was both more agreeable to others and more advantageous to herself.

For instance, the gardener's wife turned me out in the cold while she
was washing the china, whereas she let Pussy walk about on the very
table among the cups and saucers, stepping so carefully with her soft
little paws that there was no danger of any breakage. I have seen her
walk along the edge of every shelf on the dresser, without disarranging
a single plate. Then, while I was despising Puss for catching mice, I
heard the gardener's wife giving her the highest praise for being an
excellent mouser; and to my surprise, I found out that it was the
regular work for which she was kept in the house.

So, as time went on, we learnt to understand each other better and
better, and our companionship was useful in teaching us to be less
narrow-minded in our estimation of each other and things in general. I
discovered that it was not necessary for every body to be exactly alike;
that cats and dogs, and perhaps also men and women, had a right each to
his own character; and that people must be mutually accommodating, every
body giving up a little, and no one expecting to make his own way the
rule for every body. And Pussy learnt herself, and taught me another
lesson, that every body is one's superior in something, so that any body
may improve by taking pattern by any body else; I mean, by looking for
and imitating their good qualities, instead of picking out and snarling
over their faults.

Time slipped away very happily and imperceptibly. There were few changes
in our mode of life; though Pussy, from a kitten, in due time became a
full-grown cat, who left off running after her tail and climbing up the
banisters, and walked up and down stairs as steadily as I did myself. In
other respects our relations remained the same; I was the patron and
protector, she the friend and companion, sharing the same kennel and the
same platter, and both metamorphosed from the bitterest enemies into the
comfort and delight of each other's lives.

One day while we were basking in the sunshine, with our eyes half shut,
and Pussy purring pleasantly, I heard the sound of wheels at a distance.
Supposing it to be the baker's cart, I roused myself, and ran to the
gate, according to custom, to see him give in the bread. But long before
the vehicle came in sight, I smelt the difference between it and the
baker's cart. It came nearer; I felt in a state of uncommon agitation;
old recollections and associations returned with extraordinary
vividness, and my eagerness was intense till the carriage stopped at the
door. No wonder I had been so much excited; for who should be on the box
but my old friend John? and who should get out of the carriage but my
master himself.

Was I not in raptures! And did I not jump and tear about the court in my
joy! Pussy sat at the window watching my vagaries with astonishment.
When she understood the state of the case, she was very glad to see our
master, but expressed her pleasure in a more moderate way than I.

My master and John were cordial in their greetings to every body, but
they seemed very busy, and spent the rest of the day in walking over the
place and giving a number of orders. I followed close at their heels,
very happy to be in their company once more. The gardener and his wife
made many inquiries about Lily, as I would have done myself if I could;
and I listened eagerly to my master's replies, though I was rather
puzzled by some of them. He said she was quite well and very happy, but
that he missed her sadly.

"I can understand _that_," thought I, as I looked up at him in sympathy.

I believe he understood me, for he patted my head, saying, "Poor
Captain, she was very fond of you."

The gardener and his wife said that they had been "quite proud to hear
the news, for that if any body deserved her it was Sir Rodolph;" and my
master answered, "True, true; I must not complain of giving her up to
_him_."

Although I could not make out her history very accurately; but on
discussing it with Puss, and putting together everything that we heard
my master say in the garden, and John say in the kitchen, we came to the
conclusion that Lily was gone to live at some distance in a home of her
own; that Craven's good elder brother was her companion there; and that
her papa was much pleased with the arrangement, though he lost her
company. It seemed an odd affair to Pussy and me, and we purred and
pondered over it. Puss confessed that she could not understand a
person's leaving the house in which she was born. My views were larger.
I could imagine being contented in any place, provided my friends were
there too; but the separation from friends seemed an unnatural
proceeding. However, John had distinctly said that her papa was very
much pleased; so we decided that human beings were gifted with greater
powers than ourselves of bearing change, and making themselves happy and
useful under a variety of circumstances. For we had no doubt of Lily's
being happy and useful wherever she might be. I could as soon have
fancied myself encouraging my thieves, or Puss neglecting her mice, as
Lily idle or out of spirits.

In the course of the next day, John brought the carriage to the door
again, and invited me to take a drive. Much flattered, I scrambled to
the box, and sat by his side as steadily as I could, though the movement
of the carriage was not much to my taste. Several times I could not
resist trying to get down and run by the side; but John scolded me and
held me fast, only indulging me with an occasional scamper when we were
going up hill.

I had not omitted a good-humoured bark to Pussy when we started, by way
of farewell; for she came to see us off, though she was too humble to
expect an invitation to join the party. I fully supposed that we should
return in an hour or two, and that I should have the pleasure of telling
her my morning's adventures. But we travelled up hill and down hill,
through strange villages and an unknown country, and still we went on
and on, without any symptoms of turning.

In time we stopped at an inn, where my master had his dinner; and I went
with John to the stables, and saw him feed the horses, and then followed
him to the kitchen, where he too ate his dinner, and gave some to me.
Then we set off on our journey again. Now I thought we were surely going
home; but no; still straight on through new roads all day till the sun
went down and the evening grew so dark that I could not see the country;
and yet no talk of returning. John stopped the carriage, and lighted the
lamps; and then on again, at the same steady pace, through the unknown
land.

Tired of travelling in the wrong direction, as it appeared to me, and
without any object, I curled myself round at John's feet and took a long
nap. On waking, I found myself in a scene altogether strange to me. We
were passing through the streets of a city. I sat up and turned my head
from side to side, quite bewildered by the difference between such a
place and the country villages in which I had passed my life.

"Ah, you may well look about you," said John; "you are not the only one
that hasn't known what to make of London."

The noise and confusion were astonishing. Though it was now so late
that every body ought to have been asleep in their kennels, the
innumerable lights in the houses made the night as bright as day. The
streets were swarming with people; men and women, carriages and horses,
even dogs and cats, met us every moment. I supposed they must be a kind
of savages, who came out in the night like wild beasts, and I tried
barking at them to frighten them back to their dens; but it had no
effect, and John bade me be quiet. Indeed, I myself perceived that it
would be a hopeless task to bark at everybody that went by. Their
numbers were like the autumn leaves falling from the trees in our avenue
during a high wind, and I could only suppose that next day I should find
them all swept up in heaps at the side of the road.

At last we stopped before a house; and very glad I was to be ordered to
jump down and go in, and not at all sorry for the good supper that was
presently given me. I was too tired even to wonder where I was, or to do
or think of anything that night except going to sleep; and that I did
thoroughly, after my long journey.

But next day I was myself again, and up early to explore the premises.
What I saw at first was not much to my taste. I did not admire my
kennel; it was decidedly dull, fixed in the corner of a small courtyard
surrounded by high walls. No trees, no river, no garden; nothing to be
seen but a square patch of sky above the walls; nothing to be heard but
a continual heavy rumbling outside. I soon grew tired of watching the
clouds, and pacing round the little court; and as soon as the house was
open, I found my way to the street door. _There_ I could certainly not
complain of being dull. If London had seemed bustling the night before,
what was it now by broad daylight, with the full sun shining on the
countless passengers! I could scarcely keep still myself, with the
excitement of watching such incessant movement.

To my great disappointment, before long, John called me in, fearing that
I might stray from the house and be lost or stolen. Of course, I obeyed
him directly; but he perceived my vexation, and good-naturedly showed me
a locker under the hall-window, where I might sit and study the humours
of London at my pleasure. I thought I should never be tired of looking
out of that window. The scene was so new and charming, that it
reconciled me at once to my present situation, and even to the hours
which might necessarily be passed in my ugly kennel. I really preferred
it to the Manor.

There, even while my master and Lily were living with me, we were a good
deal left to ourselves. A few foot passengers and carts might come by
in the course of the day, carriages and horses perhaps once in a week.
Visitors, if they came, stayed for hours, so that I had ample time to
make myself master of their characters, as well as those of their horses
and dogs. Every body whom I knew at all, I knew intimately; and
notwithstanding Pussy's hints about rash judgments, I doubt whether I
was ever really in danger of mistaking an honest man for a thief. But if
my old home was more favourable to tranquil reflection, certainly this
place had the advantage of amusement and variety. Here there was no time
for studying character, nor doing anything else _leisurely_. I scarcely
caught a glimpse of any one, before he was out of sight. A quiet nap was
out of the question; if I so much as winked, I lost the view of
something. The stream of comers and goers was ever flowing. Nobody stood
still, nobody turned back; nobody walked up and down, as my master and
his visitors used on the terrace, while I observed their manners; here,
as soon as one had passed, his place was taken by another. I watched for
hours, expecting that some time or other they would all have gone by,
and the street be left to silence and to me. But nothing of the sort
happened; they were still going on and on, crossing each other in every
direction; and for as many as went by, there seemed always twice as many
yet to come.

In time I grew less confused, and I went out walking with my master or
John until I knew my way about the streets, so that I could be trusted
to go out by myself and come safe home again.

The care of the house also devolved once more upon me; and it was a more
responsible charge than at home, on account of the immense variety of
characters which I was obliged to understand. As to bribery, whether in
town or country, I was always incorruptible; but I found it necessary to
quicken my powers of observation, in order to be up to my duty in
London. I used sometimes to single out a suspicious individual in the
crowd, and follow him through two or three streets, till I had
thoroughly smelt out his character; and before long, I saw all I wanted
so quickly and accurately, that John himself was ready to submit his
judgment to mine. I learned to know my man, and to make him know me too;
and it would have required a daring thief to attempt our house.

I own I soon thoroughly enjoyed London and its ways, and quite left off
wishing to return to the monotony of the Manor. But though my life was
pleasant, let nobody do me the injustice to imagine that either its
novelty or its occupation could banish from my memory the dear little
companion who had formed my happiness at home. Forget my Pussy I never
did, though for a time I seemed contented without her. But, for the
first few days, I constantly expected to see her arrive. I took it for
granted that she would be brought to London just as I had been myself;
and every evening, at the hour of our own arrival, I went to the
hall-door, and sat patiently on the mat for a considerable time, fully
expecting every moment that a carriage would stop, and that I should be
the first to welcome my friend.

But day after day passed without bringing her. Plenty of other cats were
clambering about the roof of the house, or showing themselves against
the sky on the top of the wall; but they were all cross and spiteful,
setting up their backs and snarling at me if I only looked at them. I
had no wish to make their acquaintance, for there was but one cat in the
world that I cared for. My love was for the individual, not the race.
Dogs were numerous in the neighbourhood, and among them were several
intelligent, cultivated animals with whom I could be on pleasant barking
terms; but friendship is not made in a day, and these new acquaintances
could not make up for the want of my cat.

As I grew weary of watching for her in vain, I left off waiting at the
hall-door, and passed my evenings in thinking about her, sometimes by
the kitchen fire, sometimes in the study, on the rug at my master's
feet. But the more I thought about her, the more I missed her, till at
last I quite lost all my spirits. I could not eat my food without her to
partake of it; I scarcely cared to growl, and took no pleasure in
barking. In short, I pined for her as I had once done for Lily; and John
and my master asked each other every day what could be the matter with
me.

At last, finding it impossible to bear such a life any longer, I began
to consider whether there was no remedy in my power. I knew that if my
master objected to any thing, he did not lie on the rug and mope, but he
worked hard to set it to rights. The more I thought about it, the more I
perceived that mere thinking would not do; I must set to work and help
myself. So I took my resolution, and determined to risk every thing
rather than go on in this dawdling way, fretting my heart out.

But how? Why, how did I come here myself? People had tried to bring me,
and succeeded; why should not I try to bring Pussy? I might not succeed,
for I did not conceal from myself the difficulties of the undertaking;
but what great enterprise was ever accomplished without danger or
difficulty? At any rate, it was worth the trial; and if I _did_ succeed,
Pussy was worth every thing. So, as she would not come, I would go and
fetch her.

This once decided, it was evident that the sooner I set off the better;
because the road not being familiar to me, it was important that I
should travel it again before all traces of our former journey were
lost. As yet, we had not been so long in London but that I had reason to
think I should recognise the principal turnings, besides various objects
on the road. I had been asleep during part of the journey, it is true;
but I hoped that my acute sense of smell would come to my help when
eyesight failed.

And here I reflected with satisfaction upon the many advantages I had
over my master in travelling. First, what a much better nose mine was!
His seemed of very little use to him up in the air, out of reach of the
ground. If he had not been able to ask his way, I am sure he could never
have found it out by smelling. Then, how inconvenient to be obliged to
carry so many things with him! He could not move without a portmanteau
or a carpet-bag full of strange clothes, instead of being contented with
one good coat on his back. I never could understand why any body should
want more than one coat. Mine was always new, always comfortable,
suited to all seasons, and fitting beautifully, having adapted itself to
my growth at all stages of my life, without any attention from me. _I_
never had any trouble with tailors, snipping and measuring, trying on
and altering. My coat would dry on me too, whereas my poor master could
not even jump into the river without taking his off; if it so much as
rained, he wanted an umbrella. Then, he never seemed able to run any
distance. For a few hundred yards it was all very well, but after that
he began to walk; and if he made a single day's journey, he was obliged
to be helped by a horse. Poor man! I pitied him; and yet I never for a
moment hesitated to acknowledge him as my master; for, with all his
detects, I felt that he was in possession of some faculty
incomprehensible to me, but which overpowered a thousand and a thousand
times the utmost animal superiority.

But to return to my own adventures. I determined to find my way to my
native village as a dog best might, without delay. So the next morning I
set off, following my nose, which was my best guide, through the
intricacies of the London streets. More than once I took a wrong turn;
but after going a little way up the street, I always discovered my
mistake, and retraced my steps.

Once I met two gentlemen whom I knew. One asked the other if I was not
my master's dog; the other looked round and called, "Captain! Captain!"
I was very near wagging my tail and looking up at the familiar sound,
but I fortunately recollected myself in time. As he was not my master, I
was not bound to be obedient; so I held my ears and tail still by a
strong determination, and trotted on, taking no notice.

Another time, as I was sniffing the ground where several streets
branched off, I heard an ill-toned voice say, "There's a dog that has
lost his master."

"Fine dog, too," said another; "there will be a good reward advertised
for him."

"Humph, there's more to be made by him than that," replied the first;
and as I looked up at him, I recognised the very man whom I had formerly
prevented from breaking into my master's country house. I growled
fiercely; and if he had attempted to approach me, I was prepared for a
spring at his throat.

"He seems to have a spite against you; best leave him alone," said the
other. And the two turned away, evidently aware that it would not be
safe to meddle with me; and I once more pursued my journey in quiet.

Having my own reasons for not wishing to attract attention, I jostled
against as few passengers as possible, and did my utmost to keep clear
of inquisitive dogs or arrogant horses, so that I met with few
obstacles, and before mid-day arrived safely at the outskirts of London.
Then my way became much plainer; a country road, with hedges and fields
on each side, was easily tracked; and I could hold up my head in comfort
as I ran along at a good pace, instead of keeping my nose close to the
ground for fear of losing my way.

I came to a place where four roads met, and there, though but for a few
moments, I was perplexed. There was a sign-post, but that was nothing to
me; it might have been useful to my poor master, but to me it was only
one of his many encumbrances, which were superseded by my nose.

So I followed my nose up one of the roads; it would not do. Up a second
and a third; still my nose refused assent. As there was but one road
more, I had no further choice; so I troubled my nose no more, but
galloped joyfully ahead without any difficulty on the subject, wondering
whether my master would have found the way by his reason as surely as I
by my instinct.

As the day went on, I began to grow uncommonly hungry; that is to say,
hungry for _me_, who had never yet known what it was to want a meal.
Accustomed to regular daily food as often as I required it, I do not
suppose that in my comfortable life I ever knew what real hunger was,
such hunger as is felt by poor creatures with but scanty food for one
day, and uncertain even of _that_ for the next. But I felt that I should
like my dinner; and, for the first time in my life, was called upon to
find it for myself.

And, really, when a person has been accustomed to see set before him
every day, at his own hour, on his own platter, a supply of bread and
meat nicely mixed, with perhaps some pudding to finish it, and no
trouble required on his part but to eat it tidily, and say "Thank you"
after his fashion, it is no small puzzle suddenly to be obliged to
provide his own dinner from beginning to end--catching, cooking, and
serving it up. There are more in the world than I who would know how to
do nothing but eat it. If I had been a wild dog, used to the habits of
savage life, I might have hunted down some smaller animal as wild as
myself, torn it to pieces, and devoured it raw; but I was a civilised
creature, so altered by education, that in my hunting days I always
brought the game to my master instead of eating it myself; and here, on
the London high road, there was not even game to be caught. I really
was quite at a loss what to do.

In course of time I came up with a traveller sitting under a hedge,
eating a lump of bread and cheese. I would not have accepted bread and
cheese at home if it had been offered me, but now I stopped in front of
the eater and began to beg for some, licking my lips, and wagging my
tail in my most insinuating manner.

He threw me a scrap of coarse bread, saying, "There's for you; but I
dare say you are too well fed to eat it."

His supposition would have been true enough the day before; but hunger
cures daintiness, and now I was glad of such a mouthful. I bolted it in
an instant, and looked for more. He threw me one other crust, saying
that was all he could spare; and, finishing the rest himself, went on
his way, leaving me as hungry as ever.

By and by, in passing through a village, I came to a butcher's shop. The
butcher was not in sight, and meat was spread in the most tempting
manner on the board.

"How easily," thought I, "I could steal that nice raw chop, and run away
with it! Nobody could see me, and I do not believe any body could catch
me."

_Steal it_--the thought startled me. Brought up from my earliest
puppyhood in the strictest principles of honesty; able, as I imagined,
to see the best-stocked larder, or the most amply-supplied table,
without even wishing to touch what was not my own;--was I now, on the
very first temptation, the first time in my life that I had ever been
really hungry, to forget all I had been taught, and to become a _thief_?
Was it only the fear of blows that had kept me honest? Was my honesty
worthy the name, if I was only honest when I had no temptation to be
otherwise? I was ashamed of myself, and turning from the shop, passed on
with drooping ears.

Presently I met with a dog so extra fat as to show plainly that he had
never gone without his dinner, and yet he was growling over a bone as if
he had been starving. On looking more closely at him, I perceived that
he was in possession of two bones, either of them enough for one dog;
but he was unable to make use of one, for fear of the other's being
taken from him. So there he lay, with his paws upon both, growling
instead of enjoying himself. He was a larger dog than I, but not nearly
so strong, being grown helpless and unwieldly through long habits of
greediness and laziness. I saw that I could easily master him and take
one of his bones by brute force, and at first I felt inclined to help
myself by this means. I thought I had a good right so to do. I actually
wanted the necessaries of life, while he was revelling in superfluous
luxury. Was I not justified, nay more, was I not bound in common sense
and justice to take from him what he did not want, and give it to myself
who did want it? Even if I robbed him of one of his bones, I should
leave him as much as I took away.

_Robbed_--another awkward word! I paused again. Assault and robbery were
perhaps not so mean as sneaking theft, but were they more allowable? The
bones were his own, his property; given to him by some one who had a
right to dispose of them; and though at this moment I might wish for a
more equal distribution, I had sense enough to know that it would be a
bad state of things if every dog were to seize upon every neighbouring
dog's bones at his own discretion. It might suit me at this moment, but
to-morrow a stronger dog might think that _I_ had too much, and insist
upon my relinquishing half of _my_ dinner. Who was to be the judge?
Every dog would differ in opinion as to how much was his own fair share,
and how much might be left to his neighbour. No large dog would allow
another to dine while he himself was hungry; and it would end by the
strongest getting all the bones, while the poor, inferior curs were
worse off than ever. So I determined to respect the rights of property,
for the sake of small dogs as well as for my own.

After all, starvation was not inevitable. It might be possible to get a
dinner without fighting for it. I sat down opposite my new acquaintance,
and entered into civil conversation with him. I found him much more
friendly than I expected. He had certainly been accustomed to more
indulgence and idleness than was good for him, but his natural
disposition was not entirely spoilt. He was the peculiar pet of a lady,
who thought it kindness to cram him from morning till night with food
that disagreed with him, to provide him with no occupation, and to
deprive him of healthy exercise, so that no wonder he had grown lazy and
selfish; but his native spirit was not entirely extinguished, and he
assured me that a bare bone to growl over, and a little comfortable rain
and mud to disport himself in like a dog, were still the greatest treats
that could be offered to him. His temper had been farther soured by the
spite and envy of dogs around him, who, less petted themselves, and not
aware how little his petting contributed to his comfort, grudged him
every thing that he possessed, and lost no opportunity of snapping and
snarling at him.

When I reflected on the difference between his circumstances and my own,
I felt more inclined to pity than to blame him; but though I condoled
with him kindly, and whined in sympathy, I took care to give him the
best advice in my power, and to suggest such changes in his own conduct
as might tend to better his lot.

He listened with patience and candour, and showed his gratitude by
treating me with the most cordial hospitality. He gave me an excellent
bone, and offered to share his kennel with me; but after my dinner and a
nap I was so thoroughly refreshed, that I preferred continuing my
journey. He pressed me to call on him in my way back, provided I
returned alone; but honestly confessed that if I was accompanied by a
cat, he feared that the force of habit might be too strong to allow of
his being as polite to her as he could wish. Remembering my own early
prejudices, I had no right to blame him; and we parted excellent
friends, though I declined his invitation.

I met with no more adventures or difficulties. Even my night's lodging
gave me no trouble; for when it was growing dark, and I felt too tired
to run any farther, I espied a heap of straw thrown out by the
stable-door of a roadside inn, and I soon scratched and smoothed it into
as comfortable a bed as dog need wish. By break of day I was on my
travels again; and being now near my native village, in a road of which
I knew every step, I had no further perplexity, and by breakfast-time
arrived at my old home.

It had never occurred to me that any body would be surprised to see me.
Having always met with a hearty welcome, I expected one as a matter of
course; but I certainly never anticipated being received with a shout of
astonishment, and to this day I cannot understand why they were all so
amazed. But so it was. When the gardener opened the gate and saw me
sitting outside, he started as if I had been a strange dog going to fly
at him; and instead of speaking to me, began calling as loud as he could
to his wife:

"Peggy! why, Peggy, make haste, I say. Here's the dog! How did he ever
come here?"

The old lady came bustling along at double her usual speed, and I
thought she would immediately explain my appearance; but she seemed even
more surprised than her husband; she fairly screamed.

"Well to be sure!" exclaimed she as usual, as soon as she had recovered
her breath; "well to be sure! Did any body ever see such a thing? How
can he have come? Do you think master is on the road?"

"I'll run down to the turnpike and see," answered her husband; and off
he set, without bestowing a word upon me; his wife meanwhile, with her
apron thrown over her head, straining her eyes to look after him. I
wagged my tail, and patted her with my paw, and did my best to make her
understand that I was there on my own account; but her head was too full
of fancies to attend to the reality, and she persisted in looking out
for my master who was not coming, and neglecting me who was there under
her eyes. So I left her to find out the state of the case as she could,
and turned my steps towards the house, where I hoped to meet a friend,
who would think nothing so natural as my being at her side.

I peeped in at the kitchen window, and there sat my Pussy, in her old
place before the fire, looking just as when I left her--the neatest,
whitest, softest, and gentlest of creatures. _She_ was not surprised to
see me. She winked and blinked a little, as if she was dreaming of me at
that moment, and was afraid to open her eyes more than half-way, lest
the dream should vanish; but at last she opened them altogether, and the
dream turned to reality. Then, had we not a happy meeting!

There was much to tell on both sides before we could properly discuss
the grand object of my coming, and our time was a good deal taken up by
a constant succession of visitors; not dogs or cats, as might have been
expected, but boys and girls, men and women, friends of the servants,
all pouring in to see _me_. From the time that the gardener and his wife
had satisfied themselves that my master was not coming with me, they
seemed to consider my arrival stranger than ever, and to think it
necessary to inform every body of the circumstances,--though I should
certainly have supposed there would be more wonder in seeing two persons
than one. Pussy did not approve of so much company, as she always
disliked to be stared at; I, being of a less retiring turn of mind, was
perhaps rather flattered by the notice; but, by the time evening came,
even I was glad to have the house quiet. Then we lay by the fire, and
explained all our feelings to each other.

I described to my friend how unhappy I had been without her, and how
amidst all the pleasures of London I had languished for her company,
till I could bear my loneliness no longer; and I entreated her, for my
sake, to relinquish all her present habits, and to try a new life and a
new home.

She heard me with much sympathy, and owned that she too had been
unhappy; and that, notwithstanding the placid exterior which she had
thought it right to keep up, she had missed me quite as much as I missed
her. But she did not at once, as I hoped, agree eagerly to my proposal
of accompanying me to London. She hesitated. The journey seemed an
arduous undertaking. What strange dogs she might meet! what showers of
rain! what obstacles of all kinds, that had never suggested themselves
to me!

I strenuously combated all her objections, trying to convince her that
the journey which seemed so formidable would turn out a mere
pleasure-excursion. I did not mind getting wet myself; but as she did, I
was glad to assure her that there was plenty of shelter in case of rain.
Indeed, one might suppose that the whole road had been laid out for the
express convenience of cat travellers; there were such hedges, trees,
stiles, sheltered nooks, and sunny banks in every direction. Then as for
strange dogs, was I not there to protect her? was I not a match for any
dog? and did she not know that I would gladly shed the last drop of my
blood in her cause, besides enjoying a fight on my own account? She
sighed, but her sigh was a nearer approach to a purr than before, though
her objections were far from being finished.

She owned that she dreaded change. She had her own habits and her own
duties; she had been used all her life to that same house, with its
cellars and its pantries under her especial charge, and she was afraid
that in a new place she might be idle and uncomfortable.

This seemed to me a most unreasonable punctilio. I allowed that she
might fairly prefer the country, but I could not for a moment admit that
a town life need be idle. Did she suppose there were no mice in London?
I could answer for the contrary. The servants were perpetually
complaining not only of mice, but of rats; and only the day before I
started, I had heard them declare that they could not do without a cat
any longer. A most active life was open to her. The only danger was,
that she might find too much to do, and that her love of neatness and
comfort might be revolted by the dark crannies and gloomy cellars in
which she had to seek her work. But as for being _useless_, that was
indeed an idle fear any where for any body who wished to work.

She listened attentively, and began to purr in a more decided manner.

"Still," said she, "I am afraid they will miss me here."

"No doubt," I replied; "but their loss can be remedied. A house like
this can be kept in order by a very inferior cat to yourself; and after
all, you are cherished here chiefly because it was Lily's wish. Peggy
can easily find another kitten; and you know she has often said that
white cats were not to her taste, and she should much prefer a tabby."

"True, true," murmured Puss; and seeing that she was gradually
softening, I continued to place every inducement before her in the
strongest light. I represented the present unguarded state of the sugar,
candles, preserves, &c., in a manner to touch the feelings of any
domestic cat, and dwelt at some length on the improvement that must take
place in the house under her vigilant superintendence. And I finally
crowned my persuasions with the tenderest appeal to her affection for
me, drawing a vivid picture of the difference to me and to my happiness
that would result from her companionship. Pussy had for some time been
wavering, and before I had finished my harangue she purred a full
consent.

I need not describe my delight at thus gaining the great object of my
life. Some feelings should not be made public property. My happiness was
not of a nature to be boisterous, but it was such as to satisfy Pussy
that she had decided aright.

At break of day we began our grand adventure, as we were anxious to lose
no time; and we had been so well fed over-night, that we could defy
hunger for the next twenty-four hours. When I had set out on my
solitary journey, I had felt very easy about my accommodations and mode
of travelling; but now that I had my less hardy companion, many cares
crowded on my mind, and I pondered so profoundly over every arrangement,
that Puss seemed the most cheerful and courageous of the two. Indeed,
from the moment she agreed to my request, she generously gave to the
winds all her former objections, and thought of nothing but helping me,
and giving as little trouble as possible herself.

We passed through our native village quietly. All curious observers had
visited us the night before; and our friendship was so well known, that
the sight of us together attracted no notice beyond a few kind words;
but on emerging into the great world of the London road, we were obliged
to hold a consultation upon our proceedings. Though our object was the
same, our views of the best means of attaining it did not quite agree;
Pussy's idea being to avoid fighting, mine to be prepared for it.
Doubtless a combination of both principles was our true policy.

We reconnoitred our route. Fields on each side were divided from the
road by hedges, and there was a raised path between the hedge and the
road. We decided that I should run along the open path, looking out for
every danger, while Pussy, as much out of sight as possible, crept
along the field on the other side of the hedge. Though this arrangement
separated us, it was by far the safest; the thick green hedge hid the
cat from observation, and there were plenty of gaps through which we
could take an opportunity of peeping at each other, unmarked by any one
else. Moreover, the fields had attractions for Pussy besides mere
security; she could catch birds and field-mice, and thus secure a
comfortable meal at any moment.

In this manner we proceeded pleasantly for many miles; I trotting
steadily onwards, and Puss creeping behind the hedge at her usual
stealthy pace. When prudence permitted, we enlivened our journey by
various agreeable diversions. Sometimes on coming to a paling or a wall,
Puss jumped up with her usual activity, and ran along the top.
Occasionally we made a halt, while she climbed a pleasant tree, and I
reposed on the grass under its shade. Or she would rest on a sunny bank,
while I amused myself by watching any passing carriages and horses in
the road. Once or twice we left the beaten path in search of water, but
we were careful not to wander far out of our way.

In going through one village, we observed some trellis-work on the gable
end of a house, affording facilities of ascent quite irresistible to a
cat of spirit. Puss was on the perpendicular wall in an instant,
climbing hand over hand, or rather paw over paw, till she reached the
roof. There she revelled in her favourite exaltation, and enjoyed
herself thoroughly in darting over the slates, and making excursions up
and down the chimney stacks. As there were several houses adjoining, she
had the opportunity of a considerable promenade along the gutters, very
satisfactory till she came to the end of the row; but there,
unfortunately, she found no means of coming down again. There was no
trellis; and a blank wall, without a single projection to afford a
footing, was beyond even her dexterity. There was nothing to be done but
to retrace her steps, I meanwhile running along the footpath, and
looking up with some anxiety.

But we were not obliged to go back very far. The middle house was an
inn, with a sign-post before it, from which hung a picture of a red lion
rampant,--an ugly beast, and far from royal. I thought I would have
shaken him to pieces if he had been alive, but under present
circumstances I was very glad to see him. Puss sprang from the roof to
the cross-beam which supported him, and from thence easily scrambled
down his post to the ground. Very glad I was to have her at my side
again, and to make our way through the village unmolested.

[Illustration: THE JOURNEY TO LONDON. Page 84]

All these freaks had rather hindered us, as people cannot go out of
their way for amusement without wasting more time than they reckon upon;
and I now urged Puss to resist such temptations, and to keep up a steady
walk on her side of the hedge. Not being able to climb myself, I had no
sympathy with her great love of the art; and, in fact, I had sometimes
considered her power of ascending heights, and finding footing in places
inaccessible to me, as a fault in her character. But as I did not wish
to be ill-natured and disagreeable, I indulged her taste, though
believing it to be useless, if not dangerous, and often persuading her
to keep to the beaten path in every thing.

But I thought myself wiser than I was, and I had to learn by experience
that every different nature and endowment may have its peculiar
advantages. Before we were out of sight of that village, the very talent
which I had despised was the means of saving Pussy's life.

The hedgerow, which had hitherto been our safeguard and screen from
impertinent observation, had come to an end; the fields were separated
from the road only by an open ditch, and young trees enclosed in palings
were planted at regular intervals along the path. We were trotting
leisurely, thinking of no mischief, when at a turn in the road there
suddenly darted out upon us a fierce and powerful mastiff. To leap the
ditch and be at Pussy's side was the work of a moment both for him and
for me, though with very different intentions; he to assail, I to defend
her. The attack was so sudden, that Puss had not time to use her weapons
to any purpose; she just managed to give one spirited claw at his nose
with a loud hiss, and then sprang faster and higher than I had ever seen
her spring before, and gained the top of the paling just in time to
escape his seizure. If she had not been able to jump, she would have
been a dead cat. Even then she was not quite out of his reach, and he
flew after her; but I threw myself upon him while she bounded to the
little tree, and climbed its branches till she gained a place of safety.

Then the mastiff and I had a battle royal. The very recollection of it
at this day does me good. We were all in the highest state of
excitement. Puss in the tree, her back showing high above her ears, and
her tail swelled to the size of a fox's brush, puffing and spitting at
her enemy like a snake or a steam-engine; the mastiff running round the
paling on his hind legs, banging up against it on every side, and
barking and howling with rage; I, no less furious, howling and barking
at him in return, and galloping round the tree as wildly as he did.
Determined to try every thing, he turned to dash round the other way,
and we came full upon each other. I need not describe the consequences.
"Greek" may "meet Greek," and I leave the result to the learned; but if
any body had ever doubted whether when dog meets dog, "then comes the
tug of war," now was the time to convince themselves. We certainly did
tug at each other most decidedly. Our strength and courage were so
nearly equal, that for some time the victory was doubtful. Again and
again each hero, bitten, scratched, and bruised, rolled in the dust, and
rose up again shaking ears and coat, ready to rush upon his adversary
with undiminished spirit. The final issue seemed to depend entirely upon
the power of holding out longest. As I scorn to boast, I candidly
confess that I was many times ready to ask for quarter and own myself
beaten: indeed, if I had only been fighting on my own account, I must
have yielded; but the goodness of my cause supported me, and in defence
of my friend I performed exploits of valour that I did not know to be in
my nature. At last I had the satisfaction to see my enemy fairly turn
round, and with drooping head, and tail between his legs, sneak off to
his own home in a very different state of mind and body from that in
which he left it. I sent after him a bark of triumph that made the woods
re-echo; but my best reward was in my Pussy's thanks and praises, and
the happy consciousness of being her successful champion.

I required a little rest after my exertions; but before long we were on
the move again, and met with no further impediments till we arrived at
our resting-place for the night. This was under the shelter of an empty
barn, rather infested by rats, so that Puss found both food and lodging.
Tastes differ: I was glad of a comfortable roof and a warm corner; but
though Puss pressed me to partake of her provision, I preferred going
without a meal for once in my life to sharing a rat.

We were up and dressed time enough for the rising sun to meet us on our
road. I have few more "incidents of travel" to recount; indeed, beyond a
little difficulty in crossing a puddle or two without wetting my
comrade's feet, or dirtying her white stockings, we arrived at the
outskirts of London without hindrance.

But I feared that it would not be so easy to creep unobserved through
the busy streets, and I grew very uncomfortable when I found myself and
my companion in the midst of the throng. I was anxious to conceal my
fears from Puss, lest I should alarm her also; but her penetration saw
through my forced cheerfulness, and obliged me to confess my
apprehensions. True to her determination of making the best of every
thing, she was more courageous than I. With her usual good sense, she
pointed out to me that the greater the surrounding numbers, the better
the chance of any individuals passing unnoticed; that it was the idle
who hindered or molested others; and that this multitude of people,
intent upon objects of their own, would have neither time nor
inclination to annoy us.

"I know by experience, my dear Captain," continued she, "that when I am
properly occupied with my own rats, I have no temptation to interfere
with my neighbour's mice. It is when I have been sitting too long
purring in the sunshine with nothing to do, that I am in danger of being
mischievous or troublesome."

"True," I answered; "I can bear witness to that myself: and I am not
afraid of the industrious people, if they noticed us, it would be
kindly. But these are not _all_ busy,--some may be at leisure to worry
us; and I scarcely know how we are to pass unobserved; I fear we are
very remarkable. At home you know how much was said about us."

"Yes, _at home_," she replied, with a significant curl of her whiskers,
"but at home we stood alone; there was no one to compare us with. I
fancy that many are thought great personages in their own little
village, who would be quite unnoticed elsewhere. I hope that may be our
case."

"You _hope_!" exclaimed I, almost with a bark; for in spite of my fears,
I by no means admired Pussy's modest style of consolation. Mortification
got the better of prudence, and I felt that I would rather fight every
day and all day long than not be thought worth fighting with.

"I hope it for myself," she answered; "but I do not expect you to be of
the same opinion. I am content to shun danger and avoid blame; but it is
your nature to meet peril and to court praise."

"You are rather inconsistent," interrupted I, somewhat nettled: "one of
your objections to coming with me was, that you thought you could be of
no use in London; and now you are wishing to be altogether unnoticed."

"I do not see any contradiction," she replied; "one may be useful
without being conspicuous. If I can fill my own little post quietly, so
as to please you and my master, I am content that no one else should
even know of my existence. My climbing exploits are only for my own
pleasure, as you know. I have no ambition."

"Such a life would not satisfy me at all," I answered.

"So much the better," said Puss; "there would be few great things done
in the world if no one were more energetic or daring than I. It is a
capital thing that there should be such as you, able and willing to
defend the weak, and to stand up for the right without fear of
consequences. It is your proper part, and I am truly grateful to you for
acting it so nobly as you did yesterday."

This view of the matter soothed my feelings; and for the present, at any
rate, I was glad that Pussy's retiring disposition should have its way.
The more she crept through by-ways and slunk into corners, the better I
was pleased, for I was too fond of her to wish to see her in danger for
the sake of my own honour and glory.

So with care and caution we went on our way, taking every means to avoid
not only dogs and boys, but even older and wiser beings; and at last,
under lamp-posts and door-posts, through kennels and gutters, now
creeping along the ledge of a wall, now hiding under the shelter of a
friendly porch, always watching each other at every step we took, we
arrived at our own door.

All necessity for caution being now happily at an end, I indulged myself
in a bark loud enough to rouse the house, though too joyous to alarm it.
Presently our good friend John appeared in the area, talking to himself
while going about his work. We heard him say in a hesitating manner, "I
could not help almost fancying that I heard my poor Captain's bark; but
I know it is nothing but my folly, always thinking of him. He's been and
got himself stolen by some of those London dog-stealers. _I_ shall never
see him again, poor fellow."

I barked again. John looked up, and there I stood, only too happy to be
able to contradict him. Extraordinary, that knowing me as he did, he
should have thought me capable of deserting my best friends and letting
myself be enticed away by a dog-stealer! I hoped I had more sense than
that.

John said not another word, but rushed up stairs and threw the
street-door wide open. In my rapture at meeting him I forgot all
ceremony; and standing bolt upright on my hind-legs, with my fore-paws
on his shoulders, I licked his face all over. But he was too glad to see
me to take offence at my familiarity, and patted my head and returned my
caresses with cordiality equal to my own.

At first he did not see my little fellow-traveller, who, in her modest
reluctance to be intrusive, held back during the rough greetings between
John and me. But in proper time she felt it due to herself to come
forward and assert her presence; so, setting her tail bolt upright like
a standard, she began pacing softly backwards and forwards, purring
affectionately, and rubbing herself against John's legs at every turn.

"Well, Pussy," said John, as he stooped to stroke her head, "it would
take a good many human creatures to surprise me as much as you two dumb
animals have done. But come in. Come, Captain, my boy; come, little
Puss."

So saying, he ushered us across the hall to our master's study, and
tapped at the door.

"Come in," called our master.

John opened the door, and stood there without speaking a word, while
Puss and I walked forwards to our master's chair, she purring and I
wagging my tail as usual, expecting him to say something civil, but not
prepared for astonishment in our wise master. I thought we had left all
that sort of thing behind with Peggy. But my master looked up and down,
at John and us, us and John again, several times in silence. At last he
said, "It is the most extraordinary thing I ever saw. How and when did
they come?"

"Not five minutes ago, sir," answered John; "both together, as you see;
and to judge from their dusty look, they must have walked all the way."

"No doubt," replied my master. "On what day did we miss the dog?"

"Four days ago, sir, after I told you how he was moping. He must have
found his way all alone to the Manor, and brought the other back with
him. It beats every thing that ever _I_ heard."

"He must, indeed. Wonderful!" said my master.

"To be sure I did," thought I. "Where is the wonder?"

But as we were very hungry, we left John and our master to express their
surprise to each other, while we turned our steps towards the kitchen.
Even there, before we got any dinner, we were doomed to encounter a
sharp fire of exclamations from the servants; and really such incessant
expressions of amazement began to be almost mortifying. Approbation is
pleasant enough, but astonishment gives the idea that people had not
thought one capable of even one's own little good deeds. However, we
bore it all with good humour, and were soon caressed and fed to our
complete satisfaction.

The rest of our story may be told in a few words. Puss was soon
domesticated on her London hearth, and pursuing her avocations with her
customary skill and spirit. She was a universal favourite, though just
at first she had to endure a little gossip about her history and
appearance; some pronouncing her to be very pretty, others seeing
nothing particular in her worth so much trouble. But in due time her
reputation was firmly established as the prettiest cat and the best
mouser in the neighbourhood.

While she made herself useful in her department, I was not idle in mine;
and I think I may safely say that no house could boast of a more
faithful and vigilant guardian. It was difficult to determine which of
us was most useful to our master; Puss in preserving his property from
"rats and mice and such small deer," or I, in keeping off larger
depredators. Our joint business was to take care of the house, and
thorough care we took, and thoroughly were our services appreciated and
rewarded. Welcome guests on kitchen hearthstone or on drawing-room rug,
treated as pets by the servants, as friends by our master, and agreeable
company by his acquaintances, no animals have ever passed a happier
life. Lily has often been to see us; and next to the pleasure of being
once more caressed by her own hand, was that of hearing our story told
to her husband by her own lips, and our friendship mentioned with
approbation to her little son.

       *        *       *       *       *

It may seem absurd to suppose that a human being can profit by the
history of a dog; but I believe that no creature is too insignificant,
and no event too trivial, to teach some lesson to those capable of
learning it; and a moral to this little story may be found in the
advantage of making the best of untoward circumstances, and of
cultivating kindness and goodwill in place of prejudice and dislike. In
short, to any, small or great, who have hitherto found or fancied their
companions uncongenial, I would propose Puss and Captain as an example
of a new and better method of

"LIVING LIKE CAT AND DOG."


THE END.


Savill and Edwards, Printers, Chandos-street.




ORIGINAL JUVENILE LIBRARY.


A CATALOGUE

OF

NEW AND POPULAR WORKS.

PRINCIPALLY FOR THE YOUNG.

PUBLISHED BY

GRIFFITH AND FARRAN,

LATE GRANT AND GRIFFITH, SUCCESSORS TO NEWBERY AND HARRIS,

  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD.
  LONDON.

       *        *       *       *       *

A BEAUTIFUL WEDDING GIFT.

Elegantly bound in a new white morocco cloth, price _21s._

THE BRIDAL SOUVENIR;

Containing the Choicest Thoughts of the Best Authors, in Prose and
Verse. Richly illuminated in gold and colours from designs by Mr. S.
Stanesby.

*** In the preparation of this volume no expense has been spared to
produce a Gift Book of the most appropriate character and permanent
value. It consists of thirty-six quarto pages of elegant Illuminated
Printing, presenting not only an ornamental accompaniment, but also an
emblematical exposition of it in the language of flowers.


ELEGANT GIFT FOR A LADY.

With Eight beautiful coloured groups from Drawings by J. ANDREWS.
Octavo; elegantly bound in cloth, gilt edges, price _15s._

TREES, PLANTS AND FLOWERS;

Their Beauties, Uses and Influences, embracing a general and popular
account of the Vegetable World. By Mrs. R. LEE, Author of "The African
Wanderers," etc., etc.

"As full of interest as of beauty, and one of the most charming
gift-books of the season."--_Art Journal_.

"At once useful as a botanical work, and exquisite as the ornament of a
boudoir table."--_Britannia_.

Fred Markham in Russia;

    Or, the Boy Travellers in the Land of the Czar. By W.H.G.
    KINGSTON, author of "Salt Water," etc. With Illustrations.
    Fcap. 8vo. price _5s._ cloth, _5s. 6d._ gilt edges.

Might not Right;

    Or, Stories of the Discovery and Conquest of America. By the
    author of "Our Eastern Empire," etc. Illustrated by J.
    Gilbert. Royal 16mo. price _3s. 6d._ cloth; _4s. 6d._
    coloured, gilt edges.

Jack Frost and Betty Snow;

    With other Tales for Wintry Nights and Rainy Days. Illustrated
    by H. Weir. _2s. 6d._ cloth; _3s. 6d._ coloured, gilt edges.

Old Nurse's Book of Rhymes, Jingles, and Ditties.

    Edited and Illustrated by C.H. BENNETT, Author of "Shadows."
    With Ninety Engravings. Fcap. 4to. price _3s. 6d._ cloth;
    _6s._ coloured.

Maud Summers the Sightless:

    A Narrative for the Young. Illustrated by Absolon. _3s. 6d._
    cloth; _4s. 6d._ coloured, gilt edges.

Clara Hope;

    Or, the Blade and the Ear. By MISS MILNER. With Frontispiece
    by Birket Foster. Fcap. 8vo. price _3s. 6d._ cloth; _4s. 6d._
    cloth elegant, gilt edges.

The Adventures and Experiences of Biddy Dorking and of the FAT FROG.

    Edited by MRS. S.C. HALL. Illustrated by H. Weir. _2s. 6d._
    cloth; _3s. 6d._ coloured, gilt edges.

Home Pastime;

    Or, The Child's Own Toy Maker. With designs on Cards, and a
    book of instructions for making beautiful models of familiar
    objects. Price _5s._ in a neat case.

Historical Acting Charades;

    Or, Amusements for Winter Evenings. By the Author of "Cat and
    Dog," etc. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. price _3s. 6d._ cloth;
    _4s._ gilt edges.

The Story of Jack and the Giants:

    With thirty-five Illustrations by RICHARD DOYLE. Beautifully
    printed. New and Cheaper Edition. Fcap. 4to. price _2s. 6d._
    in fancy boards; _4s. 6d._ coloured, extra cloth, gilt edges.


W.H.G. KINGSTON.

Salt Water;

    Or Neil D'Arcy's Sea Life and Adventures, (a Book for Boys.)
    By W.H.G. KINGSTON, Esq., author of "Blue Jackets," "Peter the
    Whaler," "Mark Seaworth," etc. With Eight Illustrations. Fcap.
    8vo., price _5s._ cloth, _5s. 6d._ gilt edges.

    "With the exception of Capt. Marryat, we know of no English
    author who will compare with Mr. Kingston as a writer of
    nautical adventure."--_Illustrated News_.

Our Eastern Empire;

    Or, Stories from the History of British India. By the author
    of "The Martyr Land," "Sunlight through the Mist," etc. With
    Illustrations. Royal 16mo. _3s. 6d._ cloth, _4s. 6d._ coloured
    gilt edges.

    "These stories are charming, and convey a general view of the
    progress of our Empire in the East."--_Athenæum_.

Granny's Wonderful Chair;

    And its Tales of Fairy Times. By FRANCES BROWNE. With
    Illustrations by KENNY MEADOWS. _3s. 6d._ cloth, _4s. 6d._
    coloured, gilt edges.

    "They remind us of the delicious tales of the Brothers
    Grimm."--_Athenæum_.

Julia Maitland;

    Or, Pride goes before a Fall. By M. and E. KIRBY, authors of
    "The Talking Bird," etc. Illustrated by JOHN ABSOLON. Small
    4to.: price _2s. 6d._ cloth; _3s. 6d._ coloured, gilt edges.

Laugh and Grow Wise;

    By the Senior Owl of Ivy Hall. With Sixteen large coloured
    Illustrations. 4to.; price _2s. 6d._

Pictures from the Pyrenees;

    Or, Agnes' and Kate's Travels. With numerous Illustrations.
    Small 4to.; price _3s. 6d._ cloth; _4s. 6d._ coloured, gilt
    edges.

The Early Dawn;

    Or, Stories to Think about. By a COUNTRY CLERGYMAN.
    Illustrated by H. WEIR, etc. Small 4to.; price _2s. 6d._
    cloth; _3s. 6d._ coloured, gilt edges.

Gruffel Swillendrinken;

    Or, The Reproof of the Brutes. By A. CROWQUILL, author of "The
    Careless Chicken," "Funny Leaves," "Picture Fables," etc. with
    Sixteen coloured plates. 4to.; price _2s. 6d._, or on linen
    _3s. 6d._

Harry Hawkins's H-Book;

    Shewing how he learned to aspirate his H's. With a
    Frontispiece. Royal 16mo.; price _6d._

    "No family or school-room within, or indeed beyond, the sound
    of Bow bells, should be without this merry manual."--_Art
    Journal_.


DAVID STOW, ESQ.

Bible Emblems;

    With Practical Hints to Sabbath School Teachers and Parents in
    conducting Training Lessons. By DAVID STOW, Esq. Fcap. 8vo.;
    _1s._ sewed, _1s. 6d._ cloth.


MISS JEWSBURY.

Angelo;

    Or, the Pine Forest among the Alps. By GERALDINE E. JEWSBURY,
    author of "The Adopted Child," etc. With Illustrations by JOHN
    ABSOLON. Small 4to; price _2s. 6d._ cloth; _3s. 6d._ coloured,
    gilt edges.

    "A book that is sure to be read by a child with interest and
    delight."--_Manchester Examiner_.

The Martyr Land;

    Or, Tales of the Vaudois. By the Author of "Our Eastern
    Empire," etc. Frontispiece by J. GILBERT. Royal 16mo; price
    _3s. 6d._ cloth.

    "A narrative of one of the noblest struggles in Christian
    history, and with this history Protestant youth cannot be made
    too early acquainted."--_London Literary Review_.

    "We must pronounce the authoress to be an exceedingly
    successful writer of books for children. While practical
    lessons run throughout, they are never obtruded."--_English
    Churchman_.


MRS. R. LEE'S LAST WORK.

Sir Thomas;

    Or, the Adventures of a Cornish Baronet in Western Africa. By
    MRS. R. LEE, Author of "The African Wanderers," etc. With
    Illustrations by J. GILBERT. Fcap. 8vo; _3s. 6d._ cloth; _4s.
    6d._ coloured.

    "The intimate knowledge of African customs possessed by MRS.
    LEE, enables her to convey ample information in a most
    pleasing form."--_Britannia_.


ALFRED CROWQUILL.

Tales of Magic and Meaning.

    Written and Illustrated by ALFRED CROWQUILL, Author of "Funny
    Leaves for the Younger Branches," "The Careless Chicken,"
    "Picture Fables," etc. Small 4to.; price _3s. 6d._ cloth; _4s.
    6d._ coloured.

    "Cleverly written, abounding in frolic and pathos, and
    inculcates so pure a moral, that we must pronounce him a very
    fortunate little fellow, who catches these "Tales of Magic,"
    as a windfall from "The Christmas Tree."--_Athenæum_.


M. AND E. KIRBY.

The Talking Bird;

    Or, the Little Girl who knew what was going to happen. By MARY
    and ELIZABETH KIRBY, Authors of "The Discontented Children,"
    etc. With Illustrations by H.K. BROWNE (PHIZ). Small 4to;
    price _2s. 6d._ cloth; _3s. 6d._ coloured, gilt edges.

    "With great good sense, and valuable moral teaching, much fun
    and amusement if wisely intermixed."--_Britannia_.

The Discontented Children;

    And How they were Cured. By M. and E. KIRBY. With
    Illustrations by H.K. BROWNE (PHIZ.). Small 4to.; price _2s.
    6d._ cloth; _3s. 6d._ coloured, gilt edges.

    "We know no better method of banishing 'discontent' from
    school-room and nursery, than by introducing this wise and
    clever story to their inmates."--_Art Journal_.


PETER PARLEY.

Faggots for the Fire Side;

    Or, Tales of Fact and Fancy. By PETER PARLEY. With Twelve
    Tinted Illustrations. Foolscap 8vo.; _4s. 6d._, cloth; _5s._
    gilt edges.

    CONTENTS.--The Boy Captive; or Jumping Rabbit's Story--The
    White Owl--Tom Titmouse--The Wolf and Fox--Bob
    Link--Autobiography of a Sparrow--The Children of the Sun: A
    Tale of the Incas--The Soldier and Musician--The Rich Man and
    His Son--The Avalanche--Flint and Steel--Songs of the Seasons,
    etc.

    "A new book by Peter Parley is a pleasant greeting for all
    boys and girls, wherever the English language is spoken and
    read. He has a happy method of conveying information, while
    seeming to address himself to the imagination."--_The Critic_.

Words by the Way Side;

    Or, the Children and the Flowers. By EMILY AYTON. With
    Illustrations by H. ANELAY. Small 4to.; price _3s. 6d._ cloth;
    _4s. 6d._ colored gilt edges.

    "Seldom have we opened a book designed for young people, which
    has afforded us greater satisfaction--it has our most cordial
    commendation."--_British Mother's Magazine_.

    "The simple and quiet manner in which the beauties of nature
    are gradually unfolded is so fascinating, and the manner in
    which everything is associated with the Creator is so natural
    and charming, that we strongly recommend the book."--_Bell's
    Messenger_.

Caw, Caw;

    Or, the Chronicles of the Crows: a tale of Spring Time.
    Illustrated by J.B. QUARTO; price _2s._ plain; _2s. 6d._
    coloured.

The Remarkable History of the House that Jack Built.

    Splendidly Illustrated and magnificently Illuminated by THE
    SON OF A GENIUS. Price _2s. in fancy cover_.

    "Magnificent in suggestion, and most comical in
    expression!"--_Athenæum_.


A BOOK FOR EVERY CHILD.

The Favourite Picture Book;

   A Gallery of Delights, designed for the Amusement and
   Instruction of the Young. With several Hundred Illustrations by
   Eminent Artists Royal 4to., price _3s. 6d._, bound in an
   Elegant Cover; _7s. 6d._ coloured or mounted on cloth; _10s.
   6d._ mounted and coloured.

_Fourth Thousand, enlarged in size, with Illustrations, 3s. 6d. cloth._

Letters from Sarawak,

    Addressed to a Child; embracing an Account of the Manners,
    Customs, and Religion of the Inhabitants of Borneo, with
    Incidents of Missionary Life among the Natives. By Mrs.
    M'DOUGALL.

    "All is new, interesting, and admirably told."--_Church and
    State Gazette_.

       *        *       *       *       *

A Peep at the Pixies;

    Or, Legends of the West. By Mrs. BRAY. Illustrated by H.K.
    BROWNE (Phiz), _3s. 6d._ cloth; _4s. 6d._ coloured, gilt
    edges.

    "A peep at the actual Pixies of Devonshire, faithfully
    described by Mrs. Bray, is a treat. Her knowledge of the
    locality, her affection for her subject, her exquisite feeling
    for nature, and her real delight in fairy lore, have given a
    freshness to the little volume we did not expect. The notes at
    the end contain matter of interest for all who feel a desire
    to know the origin of such tales and legends."--_Art Journal_.

Ocean and her Rulers;

    A Narrative of the Nations who have from the earliest ages
    held dominion over the Sea. By ALFRED ELWES. With Frontispiece
    Foolscap 8vo., _5s._ cloth, _5s. 6d._ gilt edges.

    "The volume is replete with valuable and interesting
    information; and we cordially recommend it as a useful
    auxiliary in the school-room, and entertaining companion in
    the library."--_Morning Post_.

The Day of a Baby Boy;

    A Story for a Young Child. By E. BERGER. With Illustrations by
    JOHN ABSOLON. Price _2s. 6d._ cloth, plain; _3s. 6d._
    coloured, gilt edges.

    "A sweet little book for the nursery."--_Christian Times_.

Cat and Dog;

    Or, Memoirs of Puss and the Captain. By the Author of "The
    Doll and her Friends," "Historical Acting Charades," etc.
    Illustrated by H. WEIR. 4th Edition. Price _2s. 6d._ cloth,
    plain; _3s. 6d._ coloured, gilt edges.

    "The author of this amusing little tale is, evidently, a keen
    observer of nature. The illustrations are well executed; and
    the moral, which points the tale, is conveyed in the most
    attractive form."--_Britannia_.

The Doll and Her Friends;

    Or, Memoirs of the Lady Seraphina. With Illustrations by Phiz.
    3rd Edition, small 4to., cloth, _2s. 6d._ plain; _3s. 6d._
    coloured.


ALFRED CROWQUILL'S COMICAL BOOKS.

_Uniform in size with_ "The Struwwelpeter."

Picture Fables.

    Written and Illustrated with Sixteen large coloured Plates by
    ALFRED CROWQUILL. Price _2s. 6d._, or mounted on linen _3s.
    6d._

The Careless Chicken;

    By the BARON KRAKEMSIDES; With Sixteen large coloured Plates,
    by ALFRED CROWQUILL. 4to., _2s. 6d._, or on linen _3s. 6d._

Funny Leaves for the Younger Branches.

    By the BARON KRAKEMSIDES, of Burstenoudelafen Castle.
    Illustrated by ALFRED CROWQUILL. 4to., coloured plates, _2s.
    6d._, or on linen _3s. 6d._

       *        *       *       *       *

Scripture Histories for Little Children.

    By the author of "Mamma's Bible Stories," etc. With Sixteen
    Illustrations, by JOHN GILBERT. _3s._ plain; _4s. 6d._
    coloured.

    CONTENTS.--The History of Joseph--History of Moses--History of
    our Saviour--The Miracles of Christ.

The Family Bible Newly Opened;

    With Uncle Goodwin's account of it. By JEFFERYS TAYLOR, author
    of "A Glance at the Globe," "The Young Islanders," etc.
    Frontispiece by JOHN GILBERT. Fcap. 8vo., _3s. 6d._ cloth.

    "A very good account of the Sacred Writings, adapted to the
    tastes, feelings, and intelligence of young
    people."--_Educational Times_.

    "Parents will also find it a great aid in the religious
    teaching of their families."--_Edinburgh Witness_.

Clarissa Donnelly;

    Or, The History of an Adopted Child. By GERALDINE E. JEWSBURY,
    with an Illustration by JOHN ABSOLON. Foolscap 8vo., price
    _3s. 6d._ cloth.

    "With wonderful power, only to be matched by as admirable a
    simplicity, Miss Jewsbury has narrated the history of a child.
    For nobility of purpose, for simple, nervous writing, and for
    artistic construction, it is one of the most valuable works of
    the day."--_Lady's Companion_.

Kate and Rosalind;

    Or, Early Experiences. By the author of "Quicksands on Foreign
    Shores," etc. With an Illustration by J. GILBERT. Fcap. 8vo.,
    price _3s. 6d._ cloth.

    "A book of unusual merit. The story is exceedingly well told,
    and the characters are drawn with a freedom and boldness
    seldom met with."--_Church of England Quarterly_.

    "We have not room to exemplify the skill with which Puseyism
    is tracked and detected. The Irish scenes are of an excellence
    that has not been surpassed since the best days of Miss
    Edgeworth."--_Fraser's Magazine_.

Good in Everything;

    Or, The Early History of Gilbert Harland. By MRS. BARWELL,
    Author of "Little Lessons for Little Learners," etc.
    Illustrated by JOHN GILBERT. Royal 16mo., cl. _3s. 6d._ plain;
    _4s. 6d._, cold., gilt edges.

    "The moral of this exquisite little tale will do more good
    than a thousand set tasks abounding with dry and uninteresting
    truisms."--_Bell's Messenger_.

Stories of Julian and his Playfellows.

    Written by HIS MAMMA. With Illustrations by JOHN ABSOLON.
    Small 4to., _2s. 6d._, plain; _3s. 6d._, coloured, gilt edges.

Tales from Catland;

    Written for Little Kittens by an OLD TABBY. With Four
    Illustrations by H. WEIR. Third Edit. Small 4to., _2s. 6d._
    plain; _3s. 6d._ coloured.

The Wonders of Home, in Eleven Stories.

    By GRANDFATHER GREY. Second Edition. With Illustrations. Royal
    16mo., price _3s. 6d._ cloth; _4s. 6d._ coloured.

    CONTENTS.--1. The Story of a Cup of Tea.--2. A Lump of
    Coal.--3. Some Hot Water.--4. A Piece of Sugar.--5. The Milk
    Jug.--6. A Pin.--7. Jenny's Sash.--8. Harry's Jacket.--9. A
    Tumbler.--10. A Knife.--11. This Book.

    "The idea is excellent, and its execution equally commendable.
    The subjects are well selected, and are very happily told in a
    light yet sensible manner."--_Weekly News_.


WORKS BY MRS R. LEE.

Anecdotes of the Habits and Instincts of Animals.

    By Mrs. R. LEE (formerly Mrs. Bowdich), with Illustrations by
    H. WEIR. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo., _5s._ cloth.

Anecdotes of the Habits and Instincts of Birds, REPTILES, and FISHES.

    Illustrated by H. WEIR. Fcap. 8vo., _5s._ cl.

    "Amusing, instructive, and ably written."--_Literary Gazette_.

    "Mrs. Lee's authorities--to name only one, Professor
    Owen--are, for the most part, first rate."--_Athenæum_.

Playing at Settlers; or, the Faggot House.

    With Illustrations by GILBERT. _2s. 6d._ cloth; _3s. 6d._
    coloured.

    "A pleasant story, drawn from the reminiscences of the
    author's own child-life."--_The Press_.

Twelve Stories of the Sayings and Doings of ANIMALS.

    With Four Illustrations by J.W. ARCHER. 2nd Edition, small
    4to., cloth _2s. 6d._ plain; _3s. 6d._ coloured, gilt edges.

    "It is just such books as this that educate the imagination of
    children, and enlist their sympathies for the brute
    creation."--_Nonconformist_.

Adventures in Australia;

    Or, the Wanderings of Captain Spencer in the Bush and the
    Wilds; containing accurate descriptions of the Habits of the
    Natives, and the Natural Productions and Features of the
    Country. Second Edition. With Illustrations by J.S. PROUT.
    Fcap. 8vo., _5s._ cloth.

    "The work cannot fail to achieve an extensive
    popularity."--_Art Journal_.

    "This volume should find a place in every school library; and
    it will, we are sure, be a very welcome and useful
    prize."--_Educational Times_.

Familiar Natural History.

    With Forty-two Illustrations from Drawings by HARRISON WEIR,
    Small 4to., cloth _3s. 6d._ plain; _6s._ coloured gilt edges.

The African Wanderers;

    Or, the Adventures of Carlos and Antonio; with Descriptions of
    the Manners and Customs of the Western Tribes, and the Natural
    Productions of the Country. 3rd Edit. With Engravings. Fcap.
    8vo., _5s._ cl.

    "For fascinating adventure, and rapid succession of incident,
    the volume is equal to any relation of travel we ever read. It
    exhibits marked ability as well as extensive knowledge, and
    deserves perusal from all ages."--_Britannia_.

    "In strongly recommending this admirable work to the attention
    of young readers, we feel that we are rendering a real service
    to the cause of African civilization."--_Patriot_.


WORKS BY W.H.C. KINGSTON.

Manco, the Peruvian Chief;

    Or, the Adventures of an Englishman in the Country of the
    Incas. With Illustrations by CARL SCHMOLZE. Fcap. 8vo., _5s._
    cloth.

    "A capital book; the story being one of much interest, and
    presenting a good account of the history and institutions, the
    customs and manners, of the country."--_Literary Gazette_.

Mark Seaworth;

    A Tale of the Indian Ocean. Illustrated by J. ABSOLON. Second
    Edition. Fcap. 8vo. _5s._ cloth.

    "No more interesting, nor more safe book, can be put into the
    hands of youth; and to boys especially, 'Mark Seaworth' will
    be a treasure of delight."--_Art Journal_.

Peter the Whaler;

    His early Life and Adventures in the Arctic Regions. Second
    Edition. With Illustrations. Fcap. 8vo., _5s._ cloth.

    "A better present for a boy of an active turn of mind could
    not be found. The tone of the book is manly, healthful, and
    vigorous."--_Weekly News_.

    "A book which the old may, but the young must, read when they
    have once begun it."--_Athenæum_.

Blue Jackets;

    Or, Chips of the Old Block. A Narrative of the Gallant
    Exploits of British Seamen, and of the principal Events in the
    Naval Service during the Reign of her Most Gracious Majesty
    Queen Victoria. Post 8vo.; price _7s._ _6d._ cloth.

    "A more acceptable testimonial than this to the valour and
    enterprise of the British Navy, has not issued from the press
    for many years."--_The Critic_.

       *        *       *       *       *

Rhymes of Royalty.

    The History of England in Verse, from the Norman Conquest to
    the reign of QUEEN VICTORIA; with an Appendix, comprising a
    summary of the leading events in each reign. Fcap. 8vo., with
    an Elegant Frontispiece. Price _2s. 6d._ cloth.

Tales of School Life.

    By AGNES LOUDON, Author of "Tales for Young People." With Four
    beautiful Illustrations by JOHN ABSOLON. Second Edition. Royal
    16mo., price _2s. 6d._ plain; _3s. 6d._ coloured.

    "These reminiscences of school days will be recognized as
    truthful pictures of every-day occurrence. The style is
    colloquial and pleasant, and therefore well suited to those
    for whose perusal it is intended."--_Athenæum_.

Blades and Flowers.

    Poems for Children. By M.S.C., Author of "Twilight Thoughts,"
    etc. With Frontispiece by H. ANELAY. Fcap. 8vo; price _2s._
    cloth.

Kit Bam's Adventures;

    Or, the Yarns of an Old Mariner. By MARY COWDEN CLARKE. With
    Illustrations by GEORGE CRUIKSHANK. Fcap. 8vo., price _3s.
    6d._ cloth.

    "Cruikshank's illustrations are worthy of his genius. There is
    a giant and a dwarf, which he never could have drawn, if he
    had not lived in fairy land."--_Examiner_.

Every-Day Things;

    Or, Useful Knowledge respecting the principal Animal,
    Vegetable, and Mineral Substances in common use. By A LADY.
    18mo., _2s._ cloth.

    "A little encyclopædia of useful knowledge, deserving a place
    in every juvenile library."--_Evangelical Magazine_.

The History of a Family;

    Or, Religion our best Support. With an Illustration by JOHN
    ABSOLON. Fcap. 8vo., price _2s. 6d._ cloth.

    "A natural and gracefully written story, pervaded by a tone of
    Scriptural piety, and well calculated to foster just views of
    life and duty."--_Englishwoman's Magazine_.

Facts from the World of Nature;

    ANIMATE and INANIMATE. Part 1. The Earth. Part 2. The Waters.
    Part 3. Atmospheric Phenomena. Part 4. Animal Life. By Mrs.
    LOUDON. With numerous Illustrations on Wood, and a beautiful
    Frontispiece engraved on Steel. Fcap. 8vo., price _5s._ cloth.

    "A volume as charming as it is useful."--_Church and State
    Gazette_.

The First Book of Geography;

    Specially adapted as a Text Book for Beginners, and as a Guide
    to the Young Teacher. By HUGO REID, author of "Elements of
    Astronomy," etc. Second Edition, revised. 18mo., price _1s._
    sewed.

    "One of the most sensible little books on the subject of
    Geography we have met with."--_Educational Times_.

Visits to Beechwood Farm;

    Or, Country Pleasures, and Hints for Happiness addressed to
    the Young. By CATHERINE M.A. COUPER. Four beautiful
    Illustrations by ABSOLON. Small 4to., price _3s. 6d._, plain,
    _4s. 6d._ coloured.


MARIN DE LA VOYE'S ELEMENTARY FRENCH WORKS.

Les Jeunes Narrateurs;

    Ou Petits Contes Moraux. With a Key to the difficult words and
    phrases. 18mo., price _2s._ cloth.

    The Pictorial French Grammar;

    For the Use of Children. With Eighty Illustrations. Royal
    16mo., price _2s._ illuminated cloth.


WORKS BY THE AUTHOR OF MAMMA'S BIBLE STORIES.

Fanny and her Mamma;

    Or, Lessons for Children. In which it is attempted to bring
    Scriptural Principles into daily practice; with Hints on
    Nursery Discipline. Illustrated by J. GILBERT. Second Edition.
    16mo., price _2s. 6d._ cloth; _3s. 6d._ coloured, gilt edges.

Bible Scenes;

    Or, Sunday Employment for Very Little Children. Consisting of
    Twelve Coloured Illustrations on Cards, and the History
    written in Simple Language. In a neat box. Price _3s. 6d._; or
    dissected as a Puzzle, price _6s. 6d._

    FIRST SERIES.--JOSEPH.
    SECOND SERIES.--OUR SAVIOUR.
    THIRD SERIES.--MOSES.
    FOURTH SERIES.--MIRACLES OF CHRIST.

Mamma's Bible Stories,

    For her Little Boys and Girls. Ninth and cheaper Edition.
    Twelve Engravings. _2s. 6d._ cloth; _3s. 6d._ coloured, gilt
    edges.

A Sequel to Mamma's Bible Stories.

    Third Edition. Twelve Engravings. Price _3s. 6d._ cloth.

Short and Simple Prayers,

    For the Use of Young Children. With Hymns. Fourth Edition.
    Square 16mo., price _1s. 6d._ cloth.

    "Well adapted to the capacities of children--beginning with
    the simplest forms which the youngest child may lisp at its
    mother's knee, and proceeding with those suited to its
    gradually advancing age. Special prayers, designed for
    particular circumstances and occasions, are added. We
    cordially recommend the book."--_Christian Guardian_.

Aunt Jane's Verses for Children.

    By Mrs. CREWDSON. Illustrated by H. ANELAY. Second Edition.
    Fcap. 8vo; _3s. 6d._ cloth, gilt edges.

    "A charming little volume, of excellent moral and religious
    tendency."--_Evangelical Magazine_.

Early Days of English Princes.

    By Mrs. RUSSELL GRAY. Dedicated by permission to the Duchess
    of Roxburghe. With Illustrations by JOHN FRANKLIN. Small 4to.,
    price _3s. 6d._, tinted plates, _4s. 6d._, coloured. Cloth.

Glimpses of Nature;

    And Objects of Interest described during a Visit to the Isle
    of Wight. Designed to assist and encourage Young Persons in
    forming habits of observation. By Mrs. LOUDON. Second Edition,
    with additional Illustrations, and a new Chapter on Shells.
    16mo., price _3s. 6d._ cloth.

    "We could not recommend a more valuable little volume. It is
    full of information, conveyed in the most agreeable
    manner."--_Literary Gazette_.

Home Amusements.

    A Collection of Riddles, Charades, Conundrums, Parlour Games,
    and Forfeits. New Edition, with Frontispiece. Price _2s. 6d._
    cloth.

The Celestial Empire;

    or, Points and Pickings of Information about China and the
    Chinese. By the Author of "Paul Preston," "Soldiers and
    Sailors," etc. With Twenty Engravings. Fcap. 8vo., price _3s.
    6d._, cloth.

    "This very handsome volume contains an almost incredible
    amount of information."--_Church and State Gazette_.

The Silver Swan;

    A Fairy Tale. By MADAME DE CHATELAIN. Illustrated by JOHN
    LEECH. Small 4to., price _2s. 6d._ plain; _3s. 6d._ coloured.

    "The moral is in the good, broad, unmistakeable style of the
    best fairy period."--_Athenæum_.

    "The story is written with excellent taste and sly
    humour."--_Atlas_.

The Young Jewess and her Christian School-fellows.

    By the Author of "Rhoda," etc. With a Frontispiece by J.
    GILBERT. 16mo., price _1s. 6d._ cloth.

    "Peculiarly adapted to impress upon the minds of young persons
    the powerful efficacy of example."--_Englishman's Magazine_.

Rhoda;

    Or, The Excellence of Charity. Third Edition. With Three
    Illustrations by WILLIAMS. Square 16mo., price _2s._ cloth.

    "Not only adapted for children, but many parents might derive
    great advantage from studying its simple truths."--_Church and
    State Gazette_.

Stories from the Old and New Testaments,

    On an improved plan. By the Rev. B.H. DRAPER. With 48
    Engravings. Fifth Edition. Price _5s._ cloth.

Wars of the Jews,

    As related by JOSEPHUS; adapted to the Capacities of Young
    Persons, and illustrated with 24 Engravings. Fifth Edition.
    Price _4s. 6d._ cl.

True Stories from Ancient History,

    Chronologically arranged from the Creation of the World to the
    Death of Charlemagne. By the Author of "Always Happy," etc.
    Eleventh Edition. 24 Engravings. 12mo. Price _5s._ cloth.

True Stories from Modern History,

    Chronologically arranged from the Death of Charlemagne to the
    present Time. Eighth Edition. 24 Engravings. 12mo., _5s._
    cloth.

True Stories from English History,

    Chronologically arranged from the Invasion of the Romans to
    the Present Time. Sixth Edition. 36 Engravings. _5s._ cloth.

Trimmer's Concise History of England,

    With a Continuation to the Reign of Victoria, by Mrs. MILNER,
    Author of "Life of Dean Milner," etc. With Illustrations. New
    and Cheaper Edition. In one volume, fcap. 8vo., price _5s._
    cloth.

First Steps in Scottish History,

    By MISS RODWELL, Author of "First Steps to English History,"
    etc. With 10 Illustrations by WEIGALL. _3s. 6d._ plain; _4s.
    6d._ coloured.

The Prince of Wales' Primer.

    Dedicated to her Majesty Queen Victoria. New Edition, with 300
    Engravings. Price _6d._; or Title, Frontispiece, and Cover
    printed in Gold and Colours, _1s._

Anecdotes of Kings.

    Selected from History; or, Gertrude's Stories for Children.
    New Edition. With Engravings, _2s. 6d._ plain; _3s. 6d._
    coloured.

Bible Illustrations;

    Or, a Description of Manners and Customs peculiar to the East,
    and especially Explanatory of the Holy Scriptures. By the Rev.
    B.H. DRAPER. With Illustrations. Fourth Edition. Revised by
    Dr. KITTO, Editor of "The Pictorial Bible." Price _3s. 6d._
    cloth.

The British History briefly told,

    and a Description of the Ancient Customs, Sports, and Pastimes
    of the English. With full-length Portraits of the Sovereigns
    in their proper Costumes, and 18 other Engravings. Price _3s.
    6d._ cloth.

Facts to correct Fancies;

    Or, Short Narratives compiled from the Biography of Remarkable
    Women. By a MOTHER. With Engravings, _3s. 6d._ plain; _4s.
    6d._ coloured.

Key to Knowledge;

    Or, Things in Common Use simply and shortly Explained. By a
    MOTHER, Author of "Always Happy," etc. Twelfth Edition. With
    numerous Illustrations. Price _3s. 6d._ coloured.

The Mine;

    Or, Subterranean Wonders. An Account of the Operations of the
    Miner and the Products of his Labours. By the late Rev. ISAAC
    TAYLOR. Sixth Edition. With Corrections and Additions by Mrs.
    LOUDON. 45 new Woodcuts and Steel Engravings. Price _3s. 6d._
    cloth.

The Ship;

    A Description of different kinds of Vessels, the Origin of
    Ship-building, a Brief Sketch of Naval Affairs, with the
    Distinctive Flags of different Nations, and numerous
    illustrative Engravings. By the late Rev. ISAAC TAYLOR. Fifth
    Edition. Edited by M.H. BARKER, Esq., "The Old Sailor." Price
    _3s. 6d._ cloth.


NEW ILLUSTRATED SERIES.

_In Super-Royal 16mo., beautifully printed, price 6d. each plain, 1s.
coloured._

     1. BRITISH ANIMALS, _First Series_.       }
     2. BRITISH ANIMALS, _Second Series_.      }
     3. BRITISH BIRDS.                         } Illustrated by H. WEIR;
     4. FOREIGN ANIMALS, _First Series_.       } and Descriptions by
     5. FOREIGN ANIMALS, _Second Series_.      } Mrs. LEE.
     6. FOREIGN BIRDS.                         }
     7. THE FARM AND ITS SCENES.               }
     8. THE DIVERTING HISTORY OF JOHN GILPIN, with Six Illustrations by
            WATTS PHILLIPS.
     9. THE PEACOCK AT HOME, AND BUTTERFLY'S BALL. Illustrated by H. WEIR.
    10. THE HISTORY OF JOSEPH.            }
    11. THE HISTORY OF MOSES.             } By the Author of
    12. THE HISTORY OF OUR SAVIOR.        } "Mamma's Bible Stories,"
    13. THE MIRACLES OF CHRIST.           } etc.


THE FAVOURITE LIBRARY.

_A Series of Works for the Young, complete in Twelve Volumes, each with
an Illustration by a well-known Artist, in fancy boards 1s., or extra
cloth, gilt, 1s. 6d._

     1. THE ESKDALE HERD BOY. By LADY STODDART.
     2. MRS. LEICESTER'S SCHOOL. By CHARLES and MARY LAMB.
     3. THE HISTORY OF THE ROBINS. By MRS. TRIMMER.
     4. MEMOIR OF BOB, THE SPOTTED TERRIER.
     5. KEEPER'S TRAVELS IN SEARCH OF HIS MASTER.
     6. THE SCOTTISH ORPHANS. By LADY STODDART.
     7. NEVER WRONG; or, THE YOUNG DISPUTANT.
     8. THE LIFE AND PERAMBULATIONS OF A MOUSE.
     9. TRIMMER'S INTRODUCTION TO THE KNOWLEDGE OF NATURE.
    10. RIGHT AND WRONG. By the Author of "ALWAYS HAPPY."
    11. HARRY'S HOLIDAY; or, THE DOINGS OF ONE WHO HAD NOTHING TO DO. By
            JEFFERYS TAYLOR.
    12. SHORT POEMS AND HYMNS FOR CHILDREN TO COMMIT TO MEMORY.

_The above may be had Two Volumes bound in One, at Half-a-crown cloth,
gilt edges, or 2s. plain edges._

       *        *       *       *       *

BEAUTIFUL LIBRARY EDITION.

Printed by Whittingham, with Eight Illustrations from Drawings by JOHN
ABSOLON. Square fcap. 8vo; price _5s._ cloth; _6s._ cloth elegant, gilt
edges; or, _10s. 6d._ antique morocco.


THE VICAR OF WAKEFIELD;

A Tale. By OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

    "We believe that it was old Mr. Newbery, the predecessor, in
    St. Paul's Church-yard, of Messrs. Grant and Griffith, who
    first published this story. Mr. Absolon's graphic sketches add
    greatly to the interest of the volume: altogether, it is as
    pretty an edition of the 'Vicar' as we have seen. Mrs.
    Primrose herself would consider it 'well dressed.'"--_Art
    Journal_.

    "This tale has long been a favourite subject with our artists;
    but we have never seen any designs more pleasing or more
    truthful than these."--_Gentleman's Magazine_.

    "A delightful edition of one of the most delightful of works:
    the fine old type and thick paper make this volume attractive
    to any lover of books."--_Edinburgh Guardian_.

    "This edition will find favour in the eyes of all those who
    admire this master-piece of Goldsmith's easy and graceful
    pen."--_Notes and Queries_.


WERTHEIMER AND CO., PRINTERS FINSBURY CIRCUS



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAT AND DOG***


******* This file should be named 20868-8.txt or 20868-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/8/6/20868



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

