The Project Gutenberg EBook of Second Thoughts are Best: Or a Further
Improvement of a Late Scheme to Prevent Street Robberies, by Daniel Defoe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Second Thoughts are Best: Or a Further Improvement of a Late Scheme to Prevent Street Robberies

Author: Daniel Defoe

Release Date: May 17, 2010 [EBook #32404]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECOND THOUGHTS ARE BEST ***




Produced by Steven Gibbs, Richard J. Shiffer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note: Every effort has been made to replicate this text
as faithfully as possible, including obsolete and variant spellings and
other inconsistencies. Text that has been changed to correct an obvious
error is noted at the end of this ebook.

This reprinted by D. A. Talboys, Oxford, 1841.]




SECOND

THOUGHTS ARE BEST:

OR A

FURTHER IMPROVEMENT

Of a Late

SCHEME

TO PREVENT

_STREET ROBBERIES_:

BY WHICH

Our Streets will be strongly guarded, and so gloriously illuminated,
that any part of London will be as safe and pleasant at Midnight as at
Noonday; and Burglary totally impracticable:

With

_Some Thoughts for suppressing Robberies in all the Public Roads of
England, &c._

Humbly

Offered for the Good of his Country, submitted to the Consideration of
the Parliament, and dedicated to his sacred Majesty King GEORGE II.



By ANDREW MORETON, Esq.



_LONDON._


Printed for W. MEADOWS, at the _Angel_ in _Cornhill_; and sold by J.
ROBERTS, in _Warwick-Lane_. 1729. [_Price Six Pence._




TO THE

KING'S

Most Excellent

MAJESTY,

SACRED AND MOST AUGUST!


Permit a loyal subject, in the sincerity of his heart, to press through
the crowds of courtiers who surround your royal person, and lay his
little mite, humbly offered for the public welfare, at your majesty's
feet.

Happy is it for me, as well as the whole kingdom, we have a king of such
humanity and affability; a king naturalized to us, a king who loves us,
a king in whose person as well as mind, the whole hero appears: the king
of our hearts; the king of our wishes!

Those who are dissatisfied with such a monarch, deserve to be abandoned
of God, and have the devil sent to reign over them. Yet such there are,
(pity they should wear human forms, or breathe the free air of Britain!)
who are so scandalously fickle, that if God himself was to reign, they
would yearn after their darling monarch the prince of darkness.

These are they who fly in the face of majesty, who so abuse the liberty
of the press, that from a benefit it becomes an evil, and demands
immediate regulation.

Not against your majesty only, but against many of your loyal subjects,
are arrows shot in the dark, by lurking villains who wound the
reputations of the innocent in sport. Our public newspapers, which ought
to contain nothing but what is instructive and communicative, being now
become public nuisances, vehicles of personal, private slander, and
scandalous pasquins.

Let the glory be yours, most gracious sovereign! to suppress this
growing evil; and if any hints from your most faithful subject can be of
the least use, I live but to serve, to admire, and pray for your
majesty.

               Who am,
        Most gracious Sovereign,
            Your Majesty's
  Most loyal, most dutiful, most obedient
                 subject and servant,

                             ANDREW MORETON.




THE PREFACE.


Nothing is more easy than to discover a thing already found out. This is
verified in me and that anonymous gentleman, whom the public prints have
lately complimented with a Discovery to Prevent Street Robberies;
though, by the by, we have only his vain _ipse dixit_, and the
ostentatious outcry of venal newswriters in his behalf.

But to strip him of his borrowed plumes, these are to remind the public,
that about six months ago, in a treatise, entituled, Augusta Triumphans:
or, the Way to make London the most flourishing City in the Universe, I
laid down a plain and practicable scheme for the total suppression and
prevention of street robberies, which scheme has been approved of by
several learned and judicious persons.

Oh! but say the advocates of this second-hand schemist, our project is
to be laid before the parliament. Does that make his better, or mine
worse? Have not many silly projects been laid before parliaments ere
now? Admit it be not the same (as I have but too much reason to fear it
is,) cannot the members of both houses read print as well as written
hand? Or does he think they are so prejudiced to dislike a thing the
worse for being offered without view of gain? I trust Andrew Moreton's
scheme, generously offered for the public good, will meet with as fair a
reception as that of this hireling projector.

Mine is already published; let him generously follow my example, and no
doubt, if his scheme be preferred, the government will reward him.

If my antagonist be necessitous, where is the merit? he does it for his
own sake, not for the public. If he be not necessitous, what a sordid
wretch is he to withhold his scheme for lucre? putting it up at public
sale; so that if you do not give him his price you shall not have it.

Some people, indeed, are so fond of mysteries they run down everything
that is plain and intelligible; they love darkness, whispers, and
freemasonry, despising whatever comes in the shape of a pamphlet, be it
never so useful or commendable. But in spite of prejudice, truth is the
standard by which I hope all honest and impartial men will judge me.

Though I must confess I am not a little piqued to be jockeyed out of my
labours, yet not to be behindhand with my gentleman in the clouds, who
would have the parliament buy his pig in a poke, and build up his
fortune at my expense, I have so amply enlarged and amended my scheme,
that it is now scarce like the same. I have taken in everything
possible of comprehension or practice; nor have I left him room to edge
in one single hint. I have debated the objections of divers wise and
learned men, and corrected my project accordingly; so that, on
comparison, my first thoughts will appear but as a rude and imperfect
sketch, only valuable in that it gave the idea of this more laboured and
finished performance, on which I pledge my whole reputation, being ready
to stand or fall by its success.

In order to which, I have presented copies of this book to the king and
queen's most excellent majesties, to several of the lords spiritual, and
divers honourable and worthy members of both houses, and time must show
whose scheme shall have the precedence.

In the mean time I stand prepared for the sneers of those who despise
everything and everybody but their own dear selves, as also the
objections of the puzzle causes, who will turry-lugg a thing out of all
sense and meaning, and by the cloudiness of their explanations darken
what is most plain and obvious. My business is to go straight forward,
and let the end crown the work. If men of sense approve me, I need not
value the laughter of fools, whose very approbation is scandal; for if a
thinking man is to be laughed out of every good intention or invention,
nothing will ever be done for the public good.




SECOND THOUGHTS, &c.


The principal encouragement and opportunity given to our street robbers
is, that our streets are so poorly watched; the watchmen, for the most
part, being decrepit, superannuated wretches, with one foot in the grave
and the other ready to follow; so feeble that a puff of breath can blow
them down. Poor crazy mortals! much fitter for an almshouse than a
watchhouse. A city watched and guarded by such animals is wretchedly
watched indeed.

Nay, so little terror do they carry with them, that hardy thieves make a
mere jest of them, and oftentimes oblige even the very watchman who
should apprehend, to light them in their roguery. And what can a poor
creature do, in terror of his life, surrounded by a pack of ruffians,
and no assistance near?

Add to this, that our rogues are grown more wicked than ever, and vice
in all kinds is so much winked at, that robbery is accounted a petty
crime. We take pains to puff them up in their villany, and thieves are
set out in so amiable a light in the Beggar's Opera, it has taught them
to value themselves on their profession rather than to be ashamed of it.

There was some cessation of street robberies, from the time of Bunworth
and Blewitt's execution, until the introduction of this pious opera. Now
we find the Cartouchian villanies revived, and London, that used to be
the most safe and peaceful city in the universe, is now become a scene
of rapine and danger. If some of Cartouch's gang be not come over hither
to instruct our thieves, we have, doubtless, a Cartouch of our own, and
a gang which, if not suppressed, may be full as pernicious as was ever
Cartouch's, and London may be as dangerous as Paris, if due care be not
taken.

Not content with the mischief done by the Beggar's Opera, we must have a
Quaker's Opera, forsooth, of much more evil tendency than the former;
for in this Jack Shepherd is made the hero of the drama, and runs
through such a scene of riot and success, that but too many weak minds
have been drawn away, and many unwary persons so charmed with his
appearance on the stage, dressed in that elegant manner, and his pockets
so well lined, they have forthwith commenced street-robbers or
housebreakers; so that every idle fellow, weary of honest labour, need
but fancy himself a Macheath or a Shepherd, and there is a rogue made at
once. Since, therefore, example, has such force, the stage ought to be
reformed, and nothing exhibited but what might be represented before a
bishop. They may be merry and wise: let them take the Provoked Husband
for a pattern.

A good physician seeks the cause, and weighs the symptoms before he
proceeds to prescribe; and if we trace this evil from its radix, we
shall find a cause antecedent to the two operas aforesaid: namely,
accursed Geneva, the bane and ruin of our lower class of people.

Those who deny an inferior class of people to be necessary in a body
politic, contradict reason and experience itself; since they are most
useful when industrious, and equally pernicious when lazy. By their
industry our manufactures, trade, and commerce, are carried on. The
merchant in his counting-house, and the captain in his cabin, would find
but little employment, were it not that many hands carried on the
different branches of the concerns they superintended.

But now so far are our common people infatuated with Geneva, that half
the work is not done now as formerly. It debilitates and enervates them,
nor are they near so strong and healthy as formerly.

So that if this abuse of Geneva be not stopped, we may go whoop for
husbandmen, labourers, &c.; trade must consequently stand still, and the
credit of the nation sink. Nor is the abatement of the excise, though
very considerable, and most worthy notice, any ways comparable to the
corruption of manners, destruction of health, and all the train of evils
we are threatened with from pernicious Geneva.

We will suppose a man able to maintain himself and family by his trade,
and at the same time to be a Geneva drinker. This fellow first makes
himself incapable of working by being continually drunk; which runs him
behindhand, so that he either pawns, or neglects his work, for which
reason nobody will employ him. At last, fear of arrests, his own hunger,
the cries of a family for bread, his natural desire to support an
irregular life, and a propense hatred to labour, turn but too many an
honest tradesman into an arrant desperate rogue. And these are commonly
the means that furnish us with thieves and villains in general.

Thus is a man, who might be useful in a body politic, rendered obnoxious
to the same: so that if this trade of wickedness goes on, they will
increase upon us so much that we shall not dare to stir out of our
habitations; nay, it will be well if they arrive not to the impudence of
plundering our houses at noonday.

Where is the courage of the English nation, that a gentleman, with six
or seven servants, shall be robbed by one single highwayman? Yet we have
lately had instances of this; and for this we may thank our effeminacy,
our toupee wigs, and powdered pates, our tea, and other scandalous
fopperies; and, above all, the disuse of noble and manly sports, so
necessary to a brave people, once in vogue, but now totally lost amongst
us.

Let not the reader think I run from my subject if I search the bottom of
the distemper before I propose a cure, which having done, though indeed
but slightly, for this is an argument could be carried to a much greater
length, I proceed to the purpose in manner following:--

Let the watch be composed of stout able-bodied men, and of those a
sufficient number, that is to say, a watchman to every forty houses,
twenty on one side of the way, and twenty on the other; for it is
observable that a man cannot well see distinctly beyond the extent of
twenty houses in a row; if it is a single row, and no opposite houses,
the charge must be greater, or their safety less.

This man should be elected and paid by the housekeepers themselves, to
prevent misapplication and abuse, so much complained of in the
distribution of the public money.

He should be allowed ten shillings per annum by each housekeeper, which
at forty houses, as above specified, amounts to 20_l._ per annum, almost
treble to what is at present allowed; and yet most housekeepers are
charged at least 2s. 6d. a quarter to the watch, whose beat is,
generally speaking, little less than the compass of half a mile.

What a shame it is that at least 100_l._ should be collected in some
beats, and the poor watchman should not have the one-tenth part of the
money? And this I leave to the consideration of any housekeeper who will
take the pains to inquire into the extent of a watchman's beat, and
after that cast up what is collected in the said beat, as they say for
the watch. But this is a small abuse in comparison of other parochial
misapplications, for a proof of which I refer my reader to a treatise of
mine, entituled, Parochial Tyranny.

This salary of 20_l._ per annum is something of encouragement, and a
pretty settlement for a poor man, who with frugality may live decently
thereon, and by due rest be enabled to give due and vigilant attendance;
that is to say, from evening dusk to morning light.

If a housekeeper break, or a house is empty, the poor watchman ought not
to suffer, the deficiency should be made up by the housekeepers
remaining.

The watch thus stationed, strengthened, and encouraged, let every
watchman be armed with firearms and sword; and let no watchman stand
above twenty doors distant from his fellow.

This has already been put in practice in the parish of St. Giles's in
the Fields, and has had so good an effect that it is hoped other
parishes will follow their example, which redounds not a little to the
credit of our project.

Let each watchman be provided with a horn, to sound an alarm, or in time
of danger; and let it be made penal, if not felony, for any but a
watchman to sound a horn in and about the city, from the time of their
going on, to that of their going off.

I know an objection will be here made on account of the postboys, to
obviate which, I had thoughts of a bell, but that would be too ponderous
and troublesome for a watchman to carry, besides his arms and lantern;
whereas a horn is portable, always ready, and most alarming.

Let the postboys therefore use some other signal, since this is most
convenient to this more material purpose. They may carry a bell in a
holster with ease, and give notice by that, as well as those who collect
the letters.

That the watchmen may see from one end of their walks to the other, let
a convenient number of lamps be set up, and those not of the convex
kind, which blind the eyes, and are of no manner of use; they dazzle,
but give no distinct light, and further, rather than prevent robberies.
Many persons, deceived and blinded by these _ignes fatui_, have been run
over by coaches, carts, &c., people stumbling more, even under these
very lamps, than in the dark. In short, they are most unprofitable
lights, and, in my opinion, rather abuses than benefits.

Besides, I see no reason why every ten housekeepers cannot find a lamp
among themselves, which would be four lamps in a beat, and let their
watchman dress it, rather than fatten a crew of directors.

But we are so fond of companies, it is a wonder we have not our shoes
blacked by one, and a set of directors made rich at the expense of our
very black-guards.

The watch ought to be in view, as well as in the hearing of each other,
or they may be overpowered, and much danger may happen.

The streets being thus gloriously illuminated, and so strongly guarded
by stout and able fellows, well armed and well paid, all within the view
of one another, proceed we to secure all by-turnings, courts, alleys,
lanes, &c., which may favour a street-robber's escape, and make our
project ineffectual.

A street, court, lane, alley, or other place, where the number of houses
or poverty of the inhabitants will not afford a watchman on the terms
before mentioned, should be gated in, and the inhabitants let in and out
by the watchman of the street.

Where there are even but twelve houses in a court, and the inhabitants
people of credit, they may have a separate watch to themselves, as is
practised in Boswell-court by Lincoln's-inn-fields, Angel-court in
Throckmorton-street, and many other places in London.

This I think an unexceptionable way to secure the cities and suburbs of
London and Westminster. The only difficulty I can conceive is, that
persons after dark may now and then go a little way round about by
keeping the street way, but the pleasantness and safety occasioned by
the lights and watch aforesaid, make ample amends. Let those go through
byways, and in the dark, whose deeds are so; I am for providing security
for honest men, and obstacle for rogues.

And now we have put a stop to their roguery, let us endeavour to
suppress the rogues themselves; in order to which I shall begin with
their harlots, who are, generally speaking, the first motives to their
villany, and egg them on to all manner of mischief.

And these are generally servant wenches, who stroll from place to place,
and at last, weary of working, throw themselves on the public. To
maintain these creatures, many a man turns rogue. It behoves the
government, therefore, to oblige all young wenches to keep in service.
Masters and mistresses ought likewise to see that servants of both sexes
go not a rambling when sent to church, but that they keep good hours;
for many have been ruined by junketing and staying out, instead of being
at church or at home.

Our common women ought to be restrained in the liberties they have
lately taken; they openly swear and talk so obscenely, it is a shame to
a Christian country.

Having fully handled this topic in two treatises, viz., Everybody's
Business is Nobody's Business, and Parochial Tyranny, I shall not tire
my readers with repetition, but referring them to the treatises
themselves, return to my subject, which is,--

After we have reformed the ladies, let us take their sparks in hand. And
first, let all shoe-cleaners, I mean boys and sturdy vagrants, be
suppressed, according to my scheme in Everybody's Business, &c.; as for
link-boys, alias thieves with lights, there will be no need of them when
the streets are illuminated, according to my project.

That sailors as well as soldiers may not give cause of suspicion, it is
fit they should also be quartered after the same nature; and more to
enforce it, surveyors of quarters should have rounds allotted them.

These surveyors should call at the quarters of every soldier or sailor
at a limited hour, to see if they are there or no, and register them at
home or absent accordingly; absence to be penal.

Every soldier or sailor leaving his quarters till morning, after he has
been found at home and registered, should be punished.

I must be excused if I ward every obstacle, my design being to break up
street-robbers, nest and egg.

And that thieves may not stroll about, under pretence of being destitute
of lodging, barracks or barns should be built at convenient ends of the
town, where all vagrants should be obliged to render themselves at a
stated hour, where they should have clean straw allowed them, and be
kept orderly and out of harm's way; they may be let loose if they have
apparent means of honest livelihood, otherwise they should be sent to
the workhouse of their respective parish, or to a general workhouse, of
which there is great need; and of which more hereafter.

All publichouses and gin-shops, if they should be tolerated, should be
shut up at ten.

If the government should think fit to tolerate gin-shops, I see no
reason why they may not be subject to licenses, and come into the
pot-act as well as alehouses; especially considering there is as much
gin as ale consumed nowadays.

Night houses and cellars, above all, should be totally suppressed; these
are the harbours and refuge of villains and strumpets; these are their
houses of call where there hellish trade is carried on; it is here they
wait for the signal of their scouts; here they cast their schemes, and
bring in advices; here they encourage and initiate young thieves; here
they barter and sell their stolen goods; these are their exchanges and
asylums after mischief.

Hackney coach drivers next require our care; they are the scum of the
people, and, generally speaking, the worst of rogues.

So many and such frequent robberies can never be committed without the
connivance of these villains; and it is but too much to be feared, that
at the same time they take up a fare they take up a robber, who is ready
to mark his prey, and gets up either on the box or behind; and alights
at a convenient place to perpetrate his hellish design. As for a 'snack
of the coal' as they term it, no doubt but the coachman and he have
proper understanding and rendezvous.

Many who go to the coach-office nowadays, may be mistaken in their hopes
of redress, not but the commissioners to a man treat complainants with
the utmost civility; but the penalty, which used to be on the renter,
being now on the driver, the renter or owner of that figure is clear,
and the driver has nothing to do but to be absent and laugh at the
complainant, an instance of which take in the following case:--

A hackney coachman took eighteenpence of a gentleman for a twelvepenny
fare; the gentleman took his number and complained; the driver appeared,
and was fined fifteen shillings, but the renter escaped; what was the
result? The driver absconded, the gentleman sits down at his loss of
attendance and money; had robbery or assault been the complaint, the
consequence had been the same, the gentleman is but where he was. He has
since called several times at the office, but to no purpose; all the
answer he can get is, the fellow cannot be found. I write this therefore
to undeceive those persons, who think when they have taken the number of
a coach they can punish the driver for insolence or extortion.

The law in this case ought to be turned into its old channel, that is to
say, the owner of the figure should be answerable; he ought to employ a
driver he can answer for, or drive himself.

Every renter therefore should be obliged to register, and respond for
his driver; or commissioners, figures, and all other forms, are to
little purpose.

Beggars should next be suppressed, who lounge about all day, to see
where they can steal at night. It is a shame we should suffer real
objects of charity to beg; and for those who are not so, it is a shame
but they should work.

I shall close all with these observations:--

That the extortions and cabals of tradesmen, by enhancing the prices of
provisions, is most detrimental to a state, and worthy the notice of its
legislature; for men not being able to support their families by honest
labour, and being made beggars by reason of the dearness of provisions,
ofttimes grow desperate and turn rogues. This assertion is but too true,
to prove which I appeal to the late conduct of

  The coal merchants,
  The bakers,
  The butchers,
  And, above all, the tallow chandlers.

The cabals of coal traders have for many years jockeyed us in the price
of coals; they have raised and fell them at pleasure, and made mere
stockjobbing work of it; but never so much as in his late majesty's
reign; on a great impress for seamen, they, in less than a fortnight,
raised the price of coals from twenty-three shillings to almost fifty.
What a pinch must this be on the poor, who live only from hand to mouth,
and buy their coals, poor souls! some by the half peck.

The bakers are yet more flagrant and vile; they turn plenty to famine,
and push up the price of bread without rule or reason; they have already
been detected in one bite, i.e., procuring some of the fraternity to buy
a small quantity of corn much above the market price, and then, by
making oath thereof, abuse a well-intended law, and raise the price of
bread accordingly.

Thus are the poor ground to dust, in order to fatten a pack of misers,
who know no mercy. But I hope the government will make them honest,
even against their will.

The butchers are now so extravagant in their way of living, that usual
and moderate profit will not content them; they cannot drink malt
liquor, and the poor must pay for the wine, which they swill down at an
unmerciful rate.

The price of meat should therefore be regulated according to the price
of cattle, but not according to the baker's rule afore mentioned.

But as for the tallow-chandlers, their oppressions call aloud for
redress. To what an exorbitant pitch have they raised candles; just
double what it was some years ago: nay, they threaten to have them at
tenpence per pound. How can the poor work when candles are so dear? But
we may thank our own luxury for these impositions. I see no reason why
we should not humble these upstarts by making our own candles; aye, and
our own bread too, as our forefathers have done before us.

The tallow-chandlers, to excuse themselves, lay the fault on the
melters. The melters shift it from themselves to the butchers; and so
the game goes round.

Oh but, say they, the government will lose part of its revenue: to which
I answer, that rather than they shall raise candles to double their
value, on pretence of paying a penny per pound excise; in case the
parliament will take off the duty on candles for the ease of the poor, I
will present them with a project gratis, which shall bring in almost
double the money now levied by candles, and that without the least
hardship on the subject.

Having, I hope, taken sufficient care of street-robbers, I proceed now
to clear the roads from highwaymen, footpads, &c.

Let parties of horse be stationed at all the outgoings from the city of
London; so that if a coach, wagon, &c., want a convoy, two, three, or
more may be detached by the commanding officer; these shall be
registered, and answerable for their charge; and for encouragement shall
receive so much per mile, or in the whole, convoy money.

This may be likewise practised from town to town all over England, so
that the roads will be as safe as the streets; and they who scruple the
trifle of convoy money above proposed, merit not safety.

For those who walk on foot to the adjacent villages, parties of foot may
be stationed in like manner; so that not only the subject will be free
from danger, but the soldier employed and prevented from corrupt
measures by this additional perquisite to his pay.

Nothing remains but that robbers be prosecuted at the public charge; the
trials fixed to respective days, that prosecutors may not lose so much
time, and the rewards paid in court without deduction or delay; nor
should any robber be admitted an evidence after he is taken, or pardoned
after conviction.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Transcriber's Note:

The transcriber made this change to the text to correct an obvious
error:

  1. p. 12,
       a watchman to every forty houses, twenty on
       it one side of the way, and twenty on the other; for
       is observable that a man cannot well see distinctly
       beyond the extent of twenty houses in a row;

       -->

       a watchman to every forty houses, twenty on
       one side of the way, and twenty on the other; for
       it is observable that a man cannot well see distinctly
       beyond the extent of twenty houses in a row;

End of Transcriber's Notes]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Second Thoughts are Best: Or a Further
Improvement of a Late Scheme to Prevent Street Robberies, by Daniel Defoe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECOND THOUGHTS ARE BEST ***

***** This file should be named 32404.txt or 32404.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/4/0/32404/

Produced by Steven Gibbs, Richard J. Shiffer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
