The Project Gutenberg EBook of Three Unpublished Poems, by Louisa M. Alcott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Three Unpublished Poems

Author: Louisa M. Alcott

Annotator: Clara Endicott Sears

Release Date: February 28, 2009 [EBook #28218]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE UNPUBLISHED POEMS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Carla Foust, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from scans of public domain material
produced by Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)









   Three Unpublished Poems
   By Louisa M. Alcott

[Illustration: "We sometimes hear of one who nearly died of a broken
heart but Bronson Alcott nearly died of a broken dream."

                              --MRS. HELEN BELL]

   Fruitlands Collection




   THREE UNPUBLISHED POEMS

   _By_ LOUISA M. ALCOTT

   Fruitlands Collection

   "We sometimes hear of one who nearly died of a broken
   heart--but Bronson Alcott nearly died of a broken dream."

                              MRS. HELEN BELL


There is a room upstairs in the old house at Fruitlands in Harvard,
Massachusetts, where the visitors pause and look about them with a
softening glance and often with visible emotion, as though they felt a
sudden nearness to something infinitely intimate and personal. They have
come to see the place where Bronson Alcott and the group of
transcendentalists cut themselves off from the world in the spring of
1843 and tried to found a New Eden where Evil could find no entrance,
and where all might share in common the peace of an industrious simple
life, intermixed with study and close to the heart of Nature; a
spiritual and intellectual center where mind and soul could grow in
quiet seclusion, yet with sympathetic companionship. This was Alcott's
dream.

The comedy and tragedy of the experiment have been the theme of many a
magazine article, and years have come and gone; yet hundreds of people
cross the pastures to the lonely spot each year, and wander through the
house, and listen to the story of the joy of the first glad, hopeful
days and the pitiful ending of this philosopher's plan for an earthly
Paradise.

There is so much that is quaint to see and seemingly impossible to hear,
for there were some strange theories worked out by this group of learned
men, that a sudden outburst of surprise and amusement will break into
the recital of the tale; but in the room upstairs they are wont to grow
quiet and speak in lowered voices, for they seem to feel the pathos
there of the final disillusionment. It is the room where at the end of a
laborious day Mrs. Alcott, with tired eyes, sewed and sewed, night after
night, by the light of her one flickering lamp, and where Bronson
Alcott, deserted by his followers, lay in his bed, with his face turned
to the wall, and in his despair over the bitter failure of his most
cherished dream, called upon death to release him.

The visitors stand and look at Mrs. Alcott's lace cap on the table by
the window, and the little cuffs that fell over her busy, useful hands;
at the sewing basket, left where she might have laid it when she was too
wearied to thread another needle; at all the many personal things
belonging to them both that speak so clearly of them and seem to bring
them very near. And then they turn to read the manuscripts and letters
that hang upon the walls; for on the walls at Fruitlands hang various
original manuscripts that as yet have never been published, and among
them are three poems by Louisa Alcott--Bronson Alcott's noted daughter.
These are now put before the public for the first time, and surely they
must stir a warm response in the most indifferent heart.

Indelibly impressed upon Louisa Alcott's memory were those days at
Fruitlands, when her childish feet ran swiftly over the pastures and
through the pine grove, and where in the early mornings she sat upon a
granite boulder far up on the hill and "thought thoughts"--so her diary
tells us. She afterwards was frequently heard to say that it was in
those days at Fruitlands that the seeds of her literary talents were
sown, which were to meet with such heartfelt appreciation from the
reading public, and were to give such solace and comfort to the old age
of her gifted father and devoted mother. Her love and reverence for her
father and her pride in his attainments were very beautiful: and in
order to appreciate what it was in him that inspired this great
sentiment, not only in his daughter, but in so many leading men of that
time, the eccentricities of the man whom the world called unpractical
and visionary must be forgotten, so as to get a glimpse of the Alcott
who was the intimate friend of Emerson--a genius, a philosopher, an
optimist, in spite of failure and in spite of opposition. Therefore it
seems best to give some extracts from his own writings first that will
reveal the tenor of his mind and the largeness of his heart and
intellect, in order that the poems of the daughter may be more fully
understood. The following extracts are from his book entitled "Tablets."

     "If one's life is not worshipful," he writes, "no one cares for his
     professions.... We recognize goodness wherever we find it. 'Tis the
     same helpful influence beautifying the meanest as the greatest
     service by its manners, as if it did it not."

       *       *       *       *       *

     "Enthusiasm is existence; earnestness, life's exceeding great
     reward....

     "Our dispositions are the atmosphere we breathe, and we carry our
     climate and world in ourselves. Good humor, gay spirits, are the
     liberators, ... the sure cure for spleen and melancholy ... and he
     who smiles is never beyond redemption."

       *       *       *       *       *

     "The liberal mind is of no sect; it shows to sects their departure
     from the ideal standard, and thus maintains pure religion in the
     world. But there are those whose minds, like the pupil of the eye,
     contract as the light increases. 'Tis a poor egotism that sees only
     its own image reflected in its vision.... 'Only as thou beest it,
     thou seest it!'"

       *       *       *       *       *

     "One cannot be well read unless well seasoned in thought and
     experience. Life makes the man. And he must have lived in all his
     gifts and become acclimated herein to profit by his readings.
     Living at the breadth of Shakespeare, the depth of Plato, the
     height of Christ gives the mastery, ... or if not that, a worthy
     discipleship."

And here is a quotation that reveals his great and beautiful love of
Nature:

     "Nature is the good Baptist, plunging us in her Jordan streams to
     be purified of our stains and fulfil all righteousness. And
     wheresoever our lodge, there is but the thin casement between us
     and immensity.... Nature without, Mind within, inviting us forth
     into the solacing air, the blue ether, if we will but shake our
     sloth and cares aside and step forth into her great contentments."

These are enough to show the rarified atmosphere of his thought world.
He lived upon the hilltops, so to speak. And it is curious to note that
in spite of its derision, the world has come to value many of his ideas
which at first were deemed but foolishness. The importance of taste and
beauty in the schoolroom, for instance, is now accepted throughout the
world. Yet when he first preached this, what was then a new idea, and
had the walls of his Temple School in Boston tinted in restful colors,
and placed the busts of Socrates and Plato and other learned
philosophers where they could be looked upon with reverence by his
pupils, it was thought to be absurd and even dangerous, for the old
regime of ill-lighted, ill-ventilated schoolrooms, with bare, forbidding
walls, was at its height.

So also with one of his much-laughed-at theories of farming. He
advocated growing buckwheat and turning the crop back into the soil in
order to enrich the land, and all the farmers threw their hands up as
though he had lost his reason. Yet only a year ago, when the nations
were at war, the Agricultural Department in Washington sent out
bulletins urging farmers to do this very thing as an admirable and
inexpensive method to pursue.

[Illustration: _Picture of Bronson Alcott's famous Temple School,
Boston, Mass., where he taught his philosophy to young boys and girls.
It was the first school to be decorated and furnished with artistic
taste, and he believed it developed a sense of beauty and refinement.
1830-1834. The school was in the Masonic Temple._]

The fundamental principle of his dietary system was the exclusive use of
fruits, vegetables, and all kinds of grain, eliminating all animal food.
While this was carried to excess, the idea of it does not sound so very
strange to modern ears, there being plenty of vegetarians now to
commend the theory. These things are mentioned in order to show that in
spite of much that was wholly unpractical, he advocated many theories
that have not died, but have taken root.

It was the intuitive consciousness of the sincerity of his appeal to the
world that drew his daughter Louisa so closely to him and led her to
express herself so touchingly in the following poems:


A. B. A.

_Lines Written by Louisa M. Alcott to Her Father_

   Like Bunyan's pilgrim with his pack,
     Forth went the dreaming youth
   To seek, to find, and make his own
     Wisdom, virtue, and truth.
   Life was his book, and patiently
     He studied each hard page;
   By turns reformer, outcast, priest,
     Philosopher and sage.

   Christ was his Master, and he made
     His life a gospel sweet;
   Plato and Pythagoras in him
     Found a disciple meet.
   The noblest and best his friends,
     Faithful and fond, though few;
   Eager to listen, learn, and pay
     The love and honor due.

   Power and place, silver and gold,
     He neither asked nor sought;
   Only to serve his fellowmen,
     With heart and word and thought.
   A pilgrim still, but in his pack
     No sins to frighten or oppress;
   But wisdom, morals, piety,
     To teach, to warn and bless.

   The world passed by, nor cared to take
     The treasure he could give;
   Apart he sat, content to wait
     And beautifully live;
   Unsaddened by long, lonely years
     Of want, neglect, and wrong,
   His soul to him a kingdom was,
     Steadfast, serene, and strong.

   Magnanimous and pure his life,
     Tranquil its happy end;
   Patience and peace his handmaids were,
     Death an immortal friend.
   For him no monuments need rise,
     No laurels make his pall;
   The mem'ry of the good and wise
     Outshines, outlives them all.

The explanation of the following poem seems to give added color to it.
Mr. Alcott had a habit of cutting his own hair--a feat that can
certainly be called unusual!--and it was after one of these occasions
that Miss Alcott picked up the curl and pasted it on the corner of the
paper upon which the poem is written.


_Lines Written by Louisa M. Alcott_

A LITTLE GREY CURL

   A little grey curl from my father's head
     I find unburned on the hearth,
   And give it a place in my diary here,
     With a feeling half sadness, half mirth.
   For the long white locks are our special pride,
     Though he smiles at his daughter's praise;
   But, oh, they have grown each year more thin,
     Till they are now but a silvery haze.

   That wise old head! (though it does grow bald
     With the knocks hard fortune may give)
   Has a store of faith and hope and trust,
     Which have taught him how to live.
   Though the hat be old, there's a face below
     Which telleth to those who look
   The history of a good man's life,
     And it cheers like a blessed book.

   [A]A peddler of jewels, of clocks, and of books,
     Many a year of his wandering youth;
   A peddler still, with a far richer pack,
     His wares are wisdom and love and truth.
   But now, as then, few purchase or pause,
     For he cannot learn the tricks of trade;
   Little silver he wins, but that which time
     Is sprinkling thick on his meek old head.

   But there'll come a day when the busy world,
     Grown sick with its folly and pride,
   Will remember the mild-faced peddler then
     Whom it rudely had set aside;
   Will remember the wares he offered it once
     And will seek to find him again,
   Eager to purchase truth, wisdom, and love,
     But, oh, it will seek him in vain.

   It will find but his footsteps left behind
     Along the byways of life,
   Where he patiently walked, striving the while
     To quiet its tumult and strife.
   But the peddling pilgrim has laid down his pack
     And gone with his earnings away;
   How small will they seem, remembering the debt
     Which the world too late would repay.

   God bless the dear head! and crown it with years
     Untroubled and calmly serene;
   That the autumn of life more golden may be
     For the heats and the storms that have been.
   My heritage none can ever dispute,
     My fortune will bring neither strife nor care;
   'Tis an honest name, 'tis a beautiful life,
     And the silver lock of my father's hair.

[Illustration: _PICTURE OF "FRUITLANDS"_

_The old house where Bronson Alcott and the English Mystics tried to
found a community somewhat after the order of Brook Farm in 1843.
Emerson backed the scheme. The house is open to the public Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday afternoons during the summer._]

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote A: This was true of him in his early youth.]


TO PAPA

   In high Olympus' sacred shade
     A gift Minerva wrought
   For her beloved philosopher
     Immersed in deepest thought.

   A shield to guard his aged breast
     With its enchanted mesh
   When he his nectar and ambrosia took
     To strengthen and refresh.

   Long may he live to use the life
     The hidden goddess gave,
   To keep unspotted to the end
     The gentle, just, and brave.

December, 1887.               LOUISA M. ALCOTT.


Before closing, another unpublished poem is added to the foregoing ones.
It was written by Louise Chandler Moulton upon hearing of the death of
Louisa Alcott, and is in the Fruitlands collection.


_Louisa M. Alcott_

IN MEMORIAM

   As the wind at play with a spark
     Of fire that glows through the night;
   As the speed of the soaring lark
     That wings to the sky his flight--
   So swiftly thy soul has sped
     In its upward wonderful way,
   Like the lark when the dawn is red,
     In search of the shining day.

   _Thou_ art not with the frozen dead
     Whom earth in the earth we lay,
   While the bearers softly tread,
     And the mourners kneel and pray;
   From thy semblance, dumb and stark,
     The soul has taken its flight--
   Out of the finite dark,
     Into the infinite Light.

                              LOUISE CHANDLER MOULTON.

Old letters and old poems from the pen of some well-known author of the
past that are found in unexpected places, or come to light through
unlooked-for channels, have a special charm and flavor of their own.
They seem to give out something peculiarly personal, like an echo from a
voice that has long been silent.

This great devotion that Bronson Alcott inspired in those near to him is
well known by those who have made a study of the remarkable group of men
that formed a charmed literary circle in Concord in the middle of the
last century, of whom Ralph Waldo Emerson was the distinguished leader;
yet each additional proof gives an added warmth of color and a truer
portrayal of the character of this quaint and original follower of the
Greek philosophers and of his gifted family.

The writer of this article recalls one day when the late Frank B.
Sanborn, well-known Sage of Concord, as he was called, was reading these
poems at Fruitlands. When he came to the last line of the first poem
herein given he dwelt upon it as if in deep thought. Then lifting his
head, his face lighting with one of his sudden smiles, he murmured,
"That sounds just like Louisa!"

1919                          CLARA ENDICOTT SEARS.[B]

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote B: Author of "Bronson Alcott's Fruitlands"; "Gleanings from
Old Shaker Journals"; also a novel, "The Bell-Ringer," published by
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, Mass.; Poem, "The Unfurling of the
Flag."]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's note


Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice.






End of Project Gutenberg's Three Unpublished Poems, by Louisa M. Alcott

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE UNPUBLISHED POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 28218.txt or 28218.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/2/1/28218/

Produced by David Edwards, Carla Foust, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from scans of public domain material
produced by Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
